/*title*/Sutta Nipata (Sutta Collection)


1. Uragavagga — The Snake Chapter
_________________________________

Uraga Sutta: The Snake

The monk who subdues his arisen anger
as, with herbs, snake-venom once it has spread,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who has cut off passion
without leaving a trace,
as he would plunging into a lake, a lotus,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who has cut off craving
without leaving a trace,
as if he had dried up a swift-flowing stream,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who has demolished conceit
without leaving a trace,
as a great flood, a very weak bridge made of reeds,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk seeing
in states of becoming
no essence,
as he would,
when surveying a fig tree,
no flowers,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk with no inner anger,
who has thus gone beyond
becoming & not-,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk whose discursive thoughts are dispersed,
well-dealt with inside
without leaving a trace,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who hasn't slipped past or turned back,
transcending all
this objectification,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who hasn't slipped past or turned back,
knowing with regard to the world
that "All this is unreal,"
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who hasn't slipped past or turned back,
without greed, as "All this is unreal,"
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who hasn't slipped past or turned back,
without aversion, as "All this is unreal,"
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who hasn't slipped past or turned back,
without delusion, as "All this is unreal,"
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk in whom there are no obsessions
 — the roots of unskillfulness totally destroyed —
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk in whom there's nothing born of distress
that would lead him back to this shore,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk in whom there's nothing born of desire
that would keep him bound to becoming,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.

The monk who's abandoned five hindrances,
who, untroubled, unwounded,
has crossed over doubt,
	sloughs off the near shore & far —
	as a snake, its decrepit old skin.



Dhaniya Sutta: Dhaniya the Cattleman

Dhaniya the cattleman:[1]
"The rice is cooked,
my milking done.
I live with my people
along the banks of the Mahi;
my hut is roofed, my fire lit:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

The Buddha:
"Free from anger,
my stubbornness gone,[2] 
I live for one night
along the banks of the Mahi;
my hut's roof is open, my fire out:[3] 
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

Dhaniya:
"No mosquitoes or gadflies
are to be found.
The cows range in the marshy meadow
where the grasses flourish.
They could stand the rain if it came:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

The Buddha:
"A raft, well-made,
has been lashed together.[4] 
Having crossed over,
gone to the far shore,
I've subdued the flood.
No need for a raft
is to be found:[5] 
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

Dhaniya:
"My wife is compliant, not careless,
is charming, has lived with me long.
I hear no evil about her at all:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

The Buddha:
"My mind is compliant, released,
has long been nurtured, well tamed.
No evil is to be found in me:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

Dhaniya:
"I support myself on my earnings.
My sons live in harmony,
free from disease.
I hear no evil about them at all:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

The Buddha:
"I'm in no one's employ,[6] 
I wander the whole world
on the reward [of my Awakening].
No need for earnings
is to be found:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

Dhaniya:
"There are cows, young bulls,
cows in calf, & breeding cows,
& a great bull, the leader of the herd:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

The Buddha:
"There are no cows, no young bulls,
no cows in calf or breeding cows,
no great bull, the leader of the herd:[7] 
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

Dhaniya:
"The stakes are dug-in, immovable.
The new muñja-grass halters, well-woven,
not even young bulls could break:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

The Buddha:
"Having broken my bonds
like a great bull,
like a great elephant
tearing a rotting vine,
I never again
will lie in the womb:
	so if you want, rain-god,
	go ahead & rain."

The great cloud rained down
	straightaway,
filling the lowlands & high.
Hearing the rain-god pour down,
Dhaniya said:
"How great our gain
that we've gazed
on the Blessed One!
	We go to him,
the One with vision,
	for refuge.
May you be our teacher, Great Sage.
My wife & I are compliant.
Let's follow the holy life
under the One Well-gone.
Gone to the far shore
of aging & death,
let's put an end
to suffering & stress."

Mara:[8]
"Those with children
	delight
because of their children.
Those with cattle
	delight
because of their cows.
A person's delight
comes from acquisitions,
since a person with no acquisitions
	doesn't delight."

The Buddha:
"Those with children
	grieve
because of their children.
Those with cattle
	grieve
because of their cows.
A person's grief
comes from acquisitions,
since a person with no acquisitions
	doesn't grieve."



Khaggavisana Sutta: A Rhinoceros

Renouncing violence
for all living beings,
harming not even a one,
you would not wish for offspring,
	so how a companion?
Wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

For a sociable person
there are allurements;
on the heels of allurement, this pain.
Seeing allurement's drawback,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

One whose mind
is enmeshed in sympathy
for friends & companions,
neglects the true goal.
Seeing this danger in intimacy,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Like spreading bamboo,
	entwined,
is concern for offspring & spouses.
Like a bamboo sprout,
	unentangling,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

As a deer in the wilds,
	unfettered,
goes for forage wherever it wants:
the wise person, valuing freedom,
wanders alone
like a rhinoceros.

In the midst of companions
— when staying at home,
	when going out wandering —
you are prey to requests.
Valuing the freedom
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

There is sporting & love
in the midst of companions,
& abundant fondness for offspring.
	Feeling disgust
at the prospect of parting
from those who'd be dear,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Without resistance in all four directions,
content with whatever you get,
enduring troubles with no dismay,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

They are hard to please,
some of those gone forth,
as well as those living the household life.
Shedding concern
for these offspring of others,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Cutting off the householder's marks,[1] 
like a kovilara tree
	that has shed its leaves,
the prudent one, cutting all household ties,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

If you gain a mature companion,
a fellow traveler, right-living & wise,
overcoming all dangers
	go with him, gratified,
	mindful.

If you don't gain a mature companion,
a fellow traveler, right-living & wise,
	wander alone
like a king renouncing his kingdom,
like the elephant in the Matanga wilds,
	his herd.

We praise companionship
	— yes!
Those on a par, or better,
should be chosen as friends.
If they're not to be found,
	living faultlessly,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Seeing radiant bracelets of gold,
well-made by a smith,
	clinking, clashing,
	two on an arm,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros,
[thinking:]
"In the same way,
if I were to live with another,
there would be careless talk or abusive."
Seeing this future danger,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Because sensual pleasures,
elegant, honeyed, & charming,
bewitch the mind with their manifold forms —
seeing this drawback in sensual strands —
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

"Calamity, tumor, misfortune,
disease, an arrow, a danger for me."
Seeing this danger in sensual strands,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Cold & heat, hunger & thirst,
wind & sun, horseflies & snakes:
enduring all these, without exception,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

As a great white elephant,
with massive shoulders,
renouncing his herd,
lives in the wilds wherever he wants,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

"There's no way
that one delighting in company
can touch even momentary release."
Heeding the Solar Kinsman's words,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Transcending the contortion of views,
	the sure way attained,
	the path gained,
[realizing:]
"Unled by others,
I have knowledge arisen,"
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

With no greed, no deceit,
no thirst, no hypocrisy —
	delusion & blemishes
		blown away —
with no inclinations for all the world,
			every world,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Avoid the evil companion
	disregarding the goal,
	intent on the out-of-tune way.
Don't take as a friend
someone heedless & hankering.
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Consort with one who is learned,
	who maintains the Dhamma,
	a great & quick-witted friend.
Knowing the meanings,
subdue your perplexity,
[then] wander alone
like a rhinoceros,

Free from longing, finding no pleasure
in the world's sport, love, or sensual bliss,
abstaining from adornment,
speaking the truth,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Abandoning offspring, spouse,
father, mother,
riches, grain, relatives,
& sensual pleasures
	altogether,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

"This is a bondage, a baited hook.
There's little happiness here,
next to no satisfaction,
all the more suffering & pain."
Knowing this, circumspect,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Shattering fetters,
like a fish in the water tearing a net,
like a fire not coming back to what's burnt,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Eyes downcast, not footloose,
senses guarded, with protected mind,
not oozing — not burning — with lust,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Taking off the householder's marks,[2] 
like a coral tree
	that has shed its leaves,
going forth in the ochre robe,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Showing no greed for flavors, not careless,
going from house to house for alms,
with mind unenmeshed in this family or that,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Abandoning barriers to awareness,
expelling all defilements — all —
non-dependent, cutting aversion,
			allurement,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Turning your back on pleasure & pain,
as earlier with sorrow & joy,
attaining pure equanimity,
			tranquillity,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

With persistence aroused
for the highest goal's attainment,
with mind unsmeared, not lazy in action,
firm in effort, with steadfastness & strength arisen,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Not neglecting seclusion, absorption,
constantly living the Dhamma
	in line with the Dhamma,
comprehending the danger
in states of becoming,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Intent on the ending of craving & heedful,
learned, mindful, not muddled,
certain — having reckoned the Dhamma —
	& striving,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Unstartled, 	like a lion at sounds.
Unsnared, 	like the wind in a net.
Unsmeared, like a lotus in water:
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Like a lion — forceful, strong in fang,
living as a conqueror, the king of beasts —
resort to a solitary dwelling.
Wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

At the right time consorting
with the release through good will,
			compassion,
			appreciation,
			equanimity,
unobstructed by all the world,
		any world,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

Having let go of 	passion,
			aversion,
			delusion;
having shattered 	the fetters;
undisturbed 	at the ending of life,
wander alone
like a rhinoceros.

People follow & associate
	for a motive.
Friends without a motive these days
	are rare.
They're shrewd for their own ends, & impure.
	Wander alone
like a rhinoceros.



Kasi Bharadvaja Sutta: To the Plowing Bharadvaja

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was living among the Magadhans at Dakkhinagiri in the brahman village of Ekanala. Now at that time approximately 500 of the brahman Kasi Bharadvaja's plows were yoked at the sowing time. Then, in the early morning, putting on his lower robe and taking his bowl & robes, the Blessed One went to where Kasi Bharadvaja was working. Now at that time Kasi Bharadvaja's food-distribution was underway. So the Blessed One went to Kasi Bharadvaja's food-distribution and, on arrival, stood to one side. Kasi Bharadvaja saw the Blessed One standing for alms, and on seeing him, said to him, "I, contemplative, plow & sow. Having plowed & sown, I eat. You, too, contemplative, should plow & sow. Having plowed & sown, you (will) eat."

"I, too, brahman, plow & sow. Having plowed & sown, I eat."

"But, contemplative, I don't see the Master Gotama's yoke or plow, plowshare, goad, or oxen, and yet the Master Gotama says this: 'I, too, brahman, plow & sow. Having plowed & sown, I eat.'"

Then the Kasi Bharadvaja addressed the Blessed One with a verse:

You claim to be a plowman,
but I don't see your plowing.
Being asked, tell us about your plowing
so that we may know your plowing.

[The Buddha:]
Conviction is my seed,
austerity   my rain,
	discernment my yoke & plow,
conscience  my pole,
mind        my yoke-tie,
	mindfulness my plowshare & goad.
Guarded in body,
guarded in speech,
restrained in terms of belly & food,
	I make truth a weeding-hook,
	and composure my unyoking.
Persistence, my beast of burden,
bearing me toward rest from the yoke,
takes me, without turning back,
	to where, having gone,
	one doesn't grieve.
That's how my plowing is plowed.
	It has
	as its fruit
	the deathless.
Having plowed this plowing
	one is unyoked
from all suffering
	& stress.
Then Kasi Bharadvaja, having heaped up milk-rice in a large bronze serving bowl, offered it to the Blessed One, [saying,] "May Master Gotama eat [this] milk-rice. The master is a plowman, for the Master Gotama plows the plowing that has as its fruit the deathless."

What's been chanted over with verses
shouldn't be eaten by me.
That's not the nature, brahman,
of one who's seen rightly.
What's been chanted over with verses
Awakened Ones reject.
	That being their nature, brahman,
	this is their way of life.
Serve with other food & drink
a fully-perfected great seer,
	his fermentations  ended,
	his anxiety        stilled,
for that is the field
	for one looking for merit.
"Then to whom, Master Gotama, should I give this milk-rice?"

"Brahman, I don't see that person in this world — with its devas, Maras, & Brahmas, in this generation with its royalty & common people — by whom this milk-rice, having been eaten, would be rightly digested, aside from a Tathagata or a Tathagata's disciple. In that case, brahman, throw the milk-rice away in a place without vegetation, or dump it in water with no living beings."

So Kasi Bharadvaja dumped the milk-rice in water with no living beings. And the milk-rice, when dropped in the water, hissed & sizzled, seethed & steamed. Just as an iron ball heated all day, when tossed in the water, hisses & sizzles, seethes & steams, in the same way the milk-rice, when dropped in the water, hissed & sizzled, seethed & steamed.

Then Kasi Bharadvaja — in awe, his hair standing on end — went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, throwing himself down with his head at the Blessed One's feet, said to him, "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama — through many lines of reasoning — made the Dhamma clear. I go to Master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Community of monks. May Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life. Let me obtain the going forth in Master Gotama's presence, let me obtain admission."

Then the brahman Kasi Bharadvaja obtained the going forth in the Blessed One's presence, he obtained admission. And not long after his admission — dwelling alone, secluded, heedful, ardent, & resolute — he in no long time reached & remained in the supreme goal of the celibate life, for which clansmen rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing & realizing it for himself in the here & now. He knew: "Birth is ended, the celibate life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for the sake of this world." And so Ven. Bharadvaja became another one of the arahants.



Cunda Sutta: To Cunda

[Cunda the smith:]
"I ask the sage of abundant discernment,
awakened, lord of the Dhamma, free
of craving,
			supreme
among two-legged beings,
		best
of charioteers:
	"How many contemplatives
	are there in the world?
		Please tell me."

[The Buddha:]
"Four contemplatives, Cunda. There isn't a fifth.
Being asked face-to-face, I'll explain:
	the Victor of the path,
	the teacher of the path,
	one who lives by the path,
	& one who corrupts the path."

[Cunda:]
"Whom do the Awakened
call the Victor of the path
[&] one who is an unequalled teacher of the path?
Tell me the one who lives by the path,
and explain to me one who corrupts the path."

[The Buddha:]
"He's crossed over perplexity,
his arrow removed,
delighting in Unbinding, free
of greed,
the leader of the world with its devas:
		one like this
		the Awakened
		call the Victor
		of the path.

He here knows the foremost as foremost,
who right here shows & analyzes the Dhamma,
that sage, a cutter-of-doubt unperturbed:
		he's called the second of monks,
		the teacher of the path.

	Mindful, restrained,
he lives by the well-taught 	Dhamma-principles,
				path,
associating with principles without blame:
		he's called the third of monks,
		one who lives by the path.

Creating a counterfeit
of those with good practices,
self-asserting, a corrupter of families,[1] intrusive,
deceitful, unrestrained, chaff,
going around in disguise:
		he's one who corrupts the path.

Any householder, having ferreted these out
	— a discerning disciple of those who are noble —
knowing they aren't all the same,
seeing this, his conviction's not harmed.
For how could the corrupt with the un-
	corrupt,
		the impure with the pure,
			be put on a par?"



Parabhava Sutta: Discourse on Downfall
Piyadassi Thera

Thus have I heard:

On one occasion the Blessed One was living near Savatthi, at Jetavana, at Anathapindika's monastery. Now when the night was far advanced, a certain deity, whose surpassing radiance illuminated the whole of Jetavana, came to the presence of the Blessed One, respectfully saluted him, and stood beside him. Standing thus he addressed the Blessed One in verse:

[The Deity:]
1. About the declining man we question thee, Gotama. We have come to ask the Blessed One: What is the cause of his downfall?

[The Buddha:]
2. Easily known is the progressive one, easily known is the declining one. The lover of the Dhamma prospers. The hater of the Dhamma declines.

3. We understand this as explained (by thee); this is the first cause of his downfall. Tell us the second, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

4. The vicious are dear to him. He likes not the virtuous; he approves the teachings of the ill-natured — this is the cause of his downfall.

5. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the second cause of his downfall. Tell us the third, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

6. The man who is fond of sleep and company, inactive and lazy, and manifesting anger —this is the cause of his downfall.

7. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the third cause of his downfall. Tell us the fourth, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

8. Whoever being affluent, does not support his mother and father who are old, and past their prime — this is the cause of his downfall.

9. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the fourth cause of his downfall. Tell us the fifth, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

10. Whoever by falsehood deceives either a brahmana, or a samana (a holy man), or any other mendicant — this is the cause of his downfall.

11. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the fifth cause of his downfall. Tell us the six, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

12. The person who is possessed of much wealth, who has gold, and who has an abundance of food, but enjoys his delicacies all by himself — this is the cause of his downfall.

13. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the sixth cause of his downfall. Tell us the seventh, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

14. The man who, proud of his birth, of his wealth, and of his clan, despises his relations — this is the cause of his downfall.

15. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the seventh cause of his downfall. Tell us the eighth, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

16. The man who is addicted to women (given to a life of debauchery), is a drunkard, a gambler, and a squanderer of his earnings — this is the cause of his downfall.

17. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the eighth cause of his downfall. Tell us the ninth, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

18. Not satisfied with one's own wives,[2] he is seen among the whores and the wives of others — this is the cause of his downfall.

19. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the ninth cause of his downfall. Tell us the tenth, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

20. A person past his youth takes as wife, a girl in her teens, and sleeps not being jealous of her[3] — this is the cause of his downfall.

21. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the tenth cause of his downfall. Tell us the eleventh, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

22. He who places in authority a woman given to drink and squandering, or a man of similar nature — this is the cause of his downfall.

23. We understand this as explained by thee; this is the eleventh cause of his downfall. Tell us the twelfth, O Blessed One. What is the cause of his downfall?

24. He who having but little possessions but great ambition (greed), is of warrior birth and aspires selfishly to (an unattainable) sovereignty — this is the cause of his downfall.

25. Fully realizing these (twelve) causes of downfall in the world, the sage, endowed with ariyan insight, shares a realm of security (Nibbana).



Vasala Sutta: Discourse on Outcasts

Thus have I heard:

On one occasion the Blessed One was living near Savatthi at Jetavana at Anathapindika's monastery. Then in the forenoon the Blessed One having dressed himself, took bowl and (double) robe, and entered the city of Savatthi for alms. Now at that time a fire was burning, and an offering was being prepared in the house of the brahman Aggikabharadvaja. Then the Blessed One, while on his alms round, came to the brahman's residence. The brahman seeing the Blessed One some way off, said this: "Stay there, you shaveling, stay there you wretched monk, stay there you outcast." When he spoke thus the Blessed One said to the brahman: "Do you know, brahman, who an outcast is and what the conditions are that make an outcast?" "No, indeed, Venerable Gotama, I do not know who an outcast is nor the conditions that make an outcast. It is good if Venerable Gotama were to explain the Dhamma to me so that I may know who an outcast is and what the conditions are that make an outcast."[1]

"Listen then, brahman, and pay attention, I will speak."

"Yes, Venerable Sir," replied the brahman.

1. "Whosoever is angry, harbors hatred, and is reluctant to speak well of others (discredits the good of others), perverted in views, deceitful — know him as an outcast.

2. "Whosoever in this world kills living beings, once born or twice born,[2] in whom there is no sympathy for living beings — know him as an outcast.

3. "Whosoever destroys and besieges villages and hamlets and becomes notorious as an oppressor — know him as an outcast.

4. "Be it in the village, or in the forest, whosoever steals what belongs to others, what is not given to him — know him as an outcast.

5. "Whosoever having actually incurred a debt runs away when he is pressed to pay, saying, 'I owe no debt to you' — know him as an outcast.

6. "Whosoever coveting anything, kills a person going along the road, and grabs whatever that person has — know him as an outcast.

7. "He who for his own sake or for the sake of others or for the sake of wealth, utters lies when questioned as a witness — know him as an outcast.

8. "Whosoever by force or with consent associates with the wives of relatives or friends — know him as an outcast.

9. "Whosoever being wealthy supports not his mother and father who have grown old — know him as an outcast.

10. "Whosoever strikes and annoys by (harsh) speech, mother, father, brother, sister or mother-in-law or father-in-law — know him as an outcast.

11. "Whosoever when questioned about what is good, says what is detrimental, and talks in an evasive manner- know him as an outcast.

12. "Whosoever having committed an evil deed, wishes that it may not be known to others, and commits evil in secret — know him as an outcast.

13. "Whosoever having gone to another's house, and partaken of choice food, does not honor that host by offering food when he repays the visit — know him as an outcast.

14. "Whosoever deceives by uttering lies, a brahman or an ascetic, or any other mendicant — know him as an outcast.

15. "Whosoever when a brahman or ascetic appears during mealtime angers him by harsh speech, and does not offer him (any alms) — know him as an outcast.

16. "Whosoever in this world, shrouded in ignorance, speaks harsh words (asatam) or falsehood[3] expecting to gain something — know him as an outcast.

17. "Whosoever debased by his pride, exalts himself and belittles other — know him as an outcast.

18. "Whosoever is given to anger, is miserly, has base desires, and is selfish, deceitful, shameless and fearless (in doing evil) — know him as an outcast.

19. "Whosoever reviles the Enlightened One (the Buddha), or a disciple of the Buddha, recluse or a householder — know him as an outcast.

20. "Whosoever not being an arahant, a Consummate One, pretends to be so, is a thief in the whole universe — he is the lowest of outcasts.

21. "Not by birth is one an outcast; not by birth is one a brahman. By deed one becomes an outcast, by deed one becomes a brahman.

22. "Know ye by the example I now cite (the fact that by birth one is not an outcast). There was an outcast's son, Sopaka, who became known as Matanga.

23. "This Matanga attained the highest fame so difficult to gain. Many were the warriors (kshatriyas) and brahmans who went to attend on him.

24. "Mounting the celestial chariot (the Noble Eightfold path, and driving) along the passion-free high road, (Sopaka, now a monk), reached the Brahma realm having given up sense desires.

25. "His (lowly) birth did not prevent him from being reborn in the Brahma realm. There are brahmans born in the family of preceptors, kinsmen of (veda) hymns.

26. "They are often seen committing evil deeds. In this life itself they are despised, in the next they are born in an evil state of existence. High birth does not prevent them from falling into a woeful state, or from censure.

27. "Not by birth is one an outcast; not by birth is one a brahman. By deed one becomes an outcast, by deed one becomes an brahman."

When the Buddha had thus spoken, the Brahman Aggikabharadvaja said to the Blessed One: "Excellent, O Venerable Gotama, excellent! Just as, O Venerable Gotama, a man were to set upright what had been overturned, or were to reveal what had been hidden, or were to point the way to one who had gone astray, or were to hold an oil lamp in the dark so that those with eyes may see things, even so in many ways has the Venerable Gotama expounded the Dhamma, the doctrine. I take refuge in the Venerable Gotama, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, the Order. May the Venerable Gotama accept me as a lay follower who has taken refuge from this day onwards while life lasts."



Karaniya Metta Sutta: Good Will

This is to be done by one skilled in aims
who wants to break through to the state of peace:
Be capable, upright, & straightforward,
easy to instruct, gentle, & not conceited,
content & easy to support,
with few duties, living lightly,
with peaceful faculties, masterful,
modest, & no greed for supporters.

Do not do the slightest thing
that the wise would later censure.

Think: Happy, at rest,
may all beings be happy at heart.
Whatever beings there may be,
	weak or strong, without exception,
	long, large,
	middling, short,
	subtle, blatant,
	seen & unseen,
	near & far,
	born & seeking birth:
May all beings be happy at heart.

Let no one deceive another
or despise anyone anywhere,
or through anger or irritation
wish for another to suffer.

As a mother would risk her life
to protect her child, her only child,
even so should one cultivate a limitless heart
with regard to all beings.
With good will for the entire cosmos,
cultivate a limitless heart:
Above, below, & all around,
unobstructed, without enmity or hate.
Whether standing, walking,
sitting, or lying down,
	as long as one is alert,
one should be resolved on this mindfulness.
This is called a sublime abiding
here & now.

Not taken with views,
but virtuous & consummate in vision,
having subdued desire for sensual pleasures,
	one never again
	will lie in the womb.



Alavaka Sutta: To the Alavaka Yakkha

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying at Alavi in the haunt of the Alavaka yakkha. Then the Alavaka yakkha went to the Blessed One and on arrival said to him: "Get out, contemplative!"

[Saying,] "All right, my friend," the Blessed One went out.

"Come in, contemplative!"

[Saying,] "All right, my friend," the Blessed One went in.

A second time... A third time, the Alavaka yakkha said to the Blessed One, "Get out, contemplative!"

[Saying,] "All right, my friend," the Blessed One went out.

"Come in, contemplative!"

[Saying,] "All right, my friend," the Blessed One went in.

Then a fourth time, the Alavaka yakkha said to the Blessed One, "Get out, contemplative!"

"I won't go out, my friend. Do what you have to do."

"I will ask you a question, contemplative. If you can't answer me, I will possess your mind or rip open your heart or, grabbing you by the feet, hurl you across the Ganges."

"My friend, I see no one in the cosmos with its devas, Maras & Brahmas, its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, who could possess my mind or rip open my heart or, grabbing me by the feet, hurl me across the Ganges. But nevertheless, ask me what you wish."


[Alavaka:]
What	is a person's highest wealth?
What, when well-practiced, brings bliss?
What	is the highest of savors?
Living in what way
		is one's life called the best?
		
[The Buddha:]
Conviction 	is a person's highest wealth.
Dhamma, 	when well-practiced, brings bliss.
Truth is the highest of savors.[1] 
Living with discernment,
		one's life is called best.

[Alavaka:]
How 		does one cross over the flood?
How 		cross over the sea?
How 		does one overcome suffering & stress?
How 		is a person purified?

[The Buddha:]
Through conviction	one crosses over the flood.
Through heedfulness,	the sea.
Through persistence	one overcomes
		suffering & stress.
Through discernment		a person is purified.

[Alavaka:]
How 		does one gain discernment?
How 		does one find wealth?
How 		does one attain honor?
How 		bind friends to oneself?
	Passing from this world
	to
	the next world,
how		does one not grieve?

[The Buddha:]
Convinced of the arahants' Dhamma
for attaining Unbinding,
— heedful, observant —
one listening well
		gains discernment.
Doing what's fitting,
enduring burdens,
one with initiative
		finds wealth.
Through truth
		one attains honor.
Giving
		binds friends to oneself.

Endowed with these four qualities,
	— truth,
	self-control,
	stamina,
	relinquishment —
a householder of conviction,
on passing away, doesn't grieve.

Now, go ask others,
common brahmans & contemplatives,
if anything better than
	truth,
	self-control,
	endurance,
	& relinquishment
here can be found.

[Alavaka:]
How could I go ask
common brahmans & contemplatives? —
now that today I understand
	what benefits
	the next life.

It was truly for my well-being
that the Awakened One came
	to stay in Alavi.
Today I understand
where what is given
bears great fruit.

I will wander from village to village,
		town to town,
paying homage		to the Self-awakened One
& the true rightness	of the Dhamma.




Vijaya Sutta: Victory

Whether walking, standing,
sitting, or lying down,
it flexes & stretches:
	this is the body's movement.
Joined together with tendons & bones,
plastered over with muscle & skin,
hidden by complexion,
	the body isn't seen
	for what it is:
filled with intestines, filled with stomach,
with the lump of the liver,
bladder, lungs, heart,
kidneys, spleen,
mucus, sweat, saliva, fat,
blood, synovial fluid, bile, & oil.
On top of that,
in nine streams,
filth is always flowing from it:
from the eyes : eye secretions,
from the ears : ear secretions,
from the nose : mucus,
from the mouth : now vomit,
	now phlegm,
	now bile.
from the body : beads of sweat.
And on top of that,
its hollow head is filled with brains.

The fool, beset by ignorance,
thinks it beautiful.
But when it lies dead,
	swollen, livid,
	cast away in a charnel ground,
even relatives don't care for it.
Dogs feed on it,
jackals, wolves, & worms.
Crows & vultures feed on it,
along with any other animals there.

Having heard the Awakened One's words,
the discerning monk
comprehends, for he sees it
	for what it is:
"As this is, so is that.
As that, so this."
Within & without,
he should let desire for the body
	fade away.
With desire & passion faded away,
the discerning monk arrives here:
	at the deathless,
	the calm,
	the undying state
	of Unbinding.

This two-footed, filthy, evil-smelling,
filled-with-various-carcasses,
oozing-out-here-&-there body:
Whoever would think,
on the basis of a body like this,
to exalt himself or disparage another:

	What is that
	if not blindness?



Muni Sutta: The Sage

Danger is born from intimacy,[1] 
society gives birth to dust.[2] 
	Free from intimacy,
	free from society:
such is the vision of the sage.

Who, destroying what's born
wouldn't plant again
or nourish what will arise:
They call him the wandering, singular sage.
	He has seen the state of peace.

Considering the ground,
crushing the seed,
he wouldn't nourish the sap[3] 
	— truly a sage —
seer of the ending of birth,
abandoning conjecture,
	he cannot be classified.

Knowing all dwellings,[4] 
not longing for any one anywhere
	— truly a sage —
with no coveting, without greed,
he does not build,[5] 
for he has gone 		beyond.

Overcoming all
	knowing all,
	wise.
With regard to all things:
unsmeared. Abandoning all,
in the ending of craving,
released:
	The enlightened call him a sage.

Strong in discernment,
virtuous in his practices,
	centered,
delighting in jhana,
	mindful,
freed from attachments,
no constraints :: no fermentations:[6] 
	The enlightened call him a sage.

The wandering solitary sage,
uncomplacent, unshaken by praise or blame.
Unstartled, 	like a lion at sounds.
Unsnared, 	like the wind in a net.
Unsmeared,	like a lotus in water.
Leader of others, by others unled:
	The enlightened call him a sage.

Like the pillar at a bathing ford,[7] 
	when others speak in extremes.
He, without passion,
his senses well-centered:
	The enlightened call him a sage.

Truly poised, straight as a shuttle,[8] 
he loathes evil actions.
Pondering what is on-pitch and off:[9] 
	The enlightened call him a sage.

Self-restrained, he does no evil.
Young and middle-aged,
the sage self-controlled,
never angered, he angers none:
	The enlightened call him a sage.

From the best
	the middling
		the leftovers
he receives alms.
Sustaining himself on what others give,
	neither flattering
	nor speaking disparagement:
	The enlightened call him a sage.

The wandering sage
abstaining from sex,
in youth bound by no one,
abstaining from 	intoxication[10] 
			complacency
totally apart:
	The enlightened call him a sage.

Knowing the world,
seeing the highest goal,
crossing the ocean,[11] the flood,[12] 
	— Such — [13] 
his chains broken,
unattached
without fermentation:
	The enlightened call him a sage.

These two are different,
they dwell far apart:
the householder supporting a wife
and the unselfish one, of good practices.
Slaying other beings, the householder
		is unrestrained.
Constantly the sage protects other beings,
		is controlled.

As the crested,
blue-necked peacock,
when flying,
	never matches
the wild goose
in speed:
	Even so the householder
	never keeps up with the monk,
the sage secluded,
	doing jhana
	in the forest.



2. Culavagga — The Lesser Chapter
_________________________________

Ratana Sutta: Treasures

Whatever spirits have gathered here,
	— on the earth, in the sky —
may you all be happy
& listen intently to what I say.

Thus, spirits, you should all be attentive.
Show kindness to the human race.
Day & night they give offerings,
so, being heedful, protect them.

Whatever wealth — here or beyond —
whatever exquisite treasure in the heavens,
does not, for us, equal the Tathagata.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Buddha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

The exquisite Deathless — ending, dispassion —
discovered by the Sakyan Sage in concentration:
There is nothing to equal that Dhamma.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Dhamma.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

What the excellent Awakened One extolled as pure
and called the concentration
of unmediated knowing:
No equal to that concentration can be found.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Dhamma.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

The eight persons — the four pairs —
praised by those at peace:
They, disciples of the One Well-Gone, deserve offerings.
What is given to them bears great fruit.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Sangha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

Those who, devoted, firm-minded,
apply themselves to Gotama's message,
on attaining their goal, plunge into the Deathless,
freely enjoying the Liberation they've gained.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Sangha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

An Indra pillar,[1] planted in the earth,
that even the four winds cannot shake:
that, I tell you, is like the person of integrity,
who — having comprehended
the noble truths — sees.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Sangha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

Those who have seen clearly the noble truths
well-taught by the one of deep discernment —
regardless of what [later] might make them heedless —
will come to no eighth state of becoming.[2] 
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Sangha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

At the moment of attaining sight,
one abandons three things:
	identity-views, uncertainty,
	& any attachment to precepts & practices.[3] 
One is completely released
from the four states of deprivation,[4] 
and incapable of committing
the six great wrongs.[5] 
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Sangha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

Whatever bad deed one may do
— in body, speech, or in mind —
one cannot hide it:
an incapability ascribed
to one who has seen the Way.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Sangha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

Like a forest grove with flowering tops
in the first month of the heat of the summer,
so is the foremost Dhamma he taught,
for the highest benefit, leading to Unbinding.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Buddha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

Foremost,
foremost-knowing,
foremost-giving,
foremost-bringing,
	unexcelled, he taught the
foremost Dhamma.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Buddha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

Ended the old, there is no new taking birth.
dispassioned their minds toward further becoming,
they, 			with no seed, no desire for growth,
the prudent, 	go out like this flame.
	This, too, is an exquisite treasure in the Sangha.
	By this truth may there be well-being.

Whatever spirits have gathered here,
	— on the earth, in the sky —
let us pay homage to the Buddha,
the Tathagata worshipped by beings
human & divine.
	May there be
	well-being.

Whatever spirits have gathered here,
	— on the earth, in the sky —
let us pay homage to the Dhamma
& the Tathagata worshipped by beings
human & divine.
	May there be
	well-being.

Whatever spirits have gathered here,
	— on the earth, in the sky —
let us pay homage to the Sangha
& the Tathagata worshipped by beings
human & divine.
	May there be
	well-being.



Hiri Sutta: Conscience

One who,
flouting, despising
a sense of conscience,
saying, "I am your friend,"
but not grasping
what he could do [to help]:
	know him as
	"Not my friend."

	One who,
among friends,
speaks endearing words
to which he doesn't conform,
	the wise recognize
	as speaking without doing.

He's not a friend
who's always wary,
suspecting a split,
focusing just on your weakness.
But him on whom you can depend,
like a child on its parent's breast:
	that's a true friend
	whom others can't split from you.

Carrying one's manly burden,
the fruits & rewards develop
the conditions that make for joy,
the bliss that brings praise.

Drinking the nourishment,
	the flavor,
of seclusion & calm,
one is freed from evil, devoid
	of distress,
refreshed with the nourishment
of rapture in the Dhamma.



Maha-mangala Sutta: Protection

I have heard that at one time the Blessed One was staying in Savatthi at Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery. Then a certain deva, in the far extreme of the night, her extreme radiance lighting up the entirety of Jeta's Grove, approached the Blessed One. On approaching, having bowed down to the Blessed One, she stood to one side. As she stood to one side, she addressed him with a verse.

Many devas and human beings
give thought to protection,
desiring well-being.
Tell, then, the highest protection.
The Buddha:
Not consorting with fools,
consorting with the wise,
paying homage to those worthy of homage:
	This is the highest protection.

Living in a civilized land,
having made merit in the past,
directing oneself rightly:
	This is the highest protection.

Broad knowledge, skill,
well-mastered discipline,
well-spoken words:
	This is the highest protection.

Support for one's parents,
assistance to one's wife and children,
consistency in one's work:
	This is the highest protection.

Giving, living in rectitude,
assistance to one's relatives,
deeds that are blameless:
	This is the highest protection.

Avoiding, abstaining from evil;
refraining from intoxicants,
being heedful of the qualities of the mind:
	This is the highest protection.

Respect, humility,
contentment, gratitude,
hearing the Dhamma on timely occasions:
	This is the highest protection.

Patience, compliance,
seeing contemplatives,
discussing the Dhamma on timely occasions:
	This is the highest protection.

Austerity, celibacy,
seeing the Noble Truths,
realizing Unbinding:
	This is the highest protection.

A mind that, when touched
by the ways of the world,
is unshaken, sorrowless, dustless, at rest:
	This is the highest protection.

Everywhere undefeated
when acting in this way,
people go everywhere in well-being:
	This is their highest protection.



Dhammacariya Sutta: Wrong Conduct

"The practice of Dhamma, the practice of continence, [2] mastery of this is said to be best if a person has gone forth from home to the homeless life. But if he is garrulous and, like a brute, delights in hurting others, his life is evil and his impurity increases.
"A quarrelsome bhikkhu shrouded by delusion, does not comprehend the Dhamma taught by the Awakened One when it is revealed. Annoying those practiced in meditation, being led by ignorance, he is not aware that his defiled path leads to Niraya-hell. Falling headlong, passing from womb to womb, from darkness to (greater) darkness, such a bhikkhu undergoes suffering hereafter for certain.

"As a cesspool filled over a number of years is difficult to clean, similarly, whoever is full of impurity is difficult to make pure. Whoever you know to be such, bhikkhus, bent on worldliness, having wrong desires, wrong thoughts, wrong behavior and resort, being completely united avoid him, sweep him out like dirt, remove him like rubbish. Winnow like chaff the non-recluses. Having ejected those of wrong desires, of wrong behavior and resort, be pure and mindful, dwelling with those who are pure. Being united and prudent you will make an end to suffering."



Nava Sutta: A Boat

Because:
when you honor
— as the devas, Indra —
one from whom
you might learn the Dhamma,
he, learned, honored,
confident in you,
	shows you the Dhamma.

	You, enlightened, heedful,
befriending a teacher like that,
	practicing the Dhamma in line with the Dhamma,
	pondering,
	giving it priority,
become
	knowledgeable,
	clear-minded,
	wise.

But if you consort with a piddling fool
who's	envious,
	hasn't come to the goal,
you'll go to death
without	having cleared up the Dhamma right here,
with	your doubts unresolved.

Like a man gone down to a river —
turbulent, flooding, swift-flowing —
and swept away in the current:
	how can he help others across?

Even so:
he who hasn't
	cleared up the Dhamma,
	attended to the meaning
		of what the learned say,
	crossed over his doubts:
how can he get others
to comprehend?

But as one who's embarked
	on a sturdy boat,
	with rudder & oars,
would — mindful, skillful,
knowing the needed techniques —
	carry many others across,

even so
an attainer-of-knowledge, learned,
self-developed, unwavering
can get other people to comprehend —
	if they're willing to listen,
	ready to learn.

	So:
you should befriend
a person of integrity —
	learned, intelligent.
Practicing so
as to know the goal,
when you've experienced the Dhamma,

	you get bliss.



Kimsila Sutta: With What Virtue?

"With 	what virtue,
		what behavior,
nurturing 	what actions,
would a person become rightly based
and attain the ultimate goal?"

"One should be respectful
	of one's superiors[1] 
	& not envious;
should have a sense of the time
	for seeing teachers[2];
should value the opportunity
	when a talk on Dhamma's in progress;
should listen intently
	to well-spoken words;
should go at the proper time,
	humbly, casting off stubbornness,
	to one's teacher's presence;
should both recollect & follow
	the Dhamma, its meaning,
	restraint, & the holy life.

Delighting in 	Dhamma,
savoring 		Dhamma,
established in 	Dhamma,
with a sense of how
to investigate 	Dhamma,
one should not speak in ways
destructive 		of Dhamma,[3] 
should guide oneself
with true, well-spoken words.

	Shedding
laughter, 		chattering,
lamentation, 	hatred,
deception, 		deviousness,
greed, 		pride,
confrontation, 	roughness,
astringency, 		infatuation,
one should go about free
of 		intoxication,
	steadfast within.

Understanding's the heartwood
	of well-spoken words;
concentration, the heartwood
	of learning & understanding.

When a person is hasty & heedless
his discernment & learning
	don't grow.
While those who delight
in the doctrines taught by the noble ones,
	are unexcelled
in word, action, & mind.
They, established in
		calm,
		composure, &
		concentration,
have reached
what discernment & learning
have as their heartwood."



Utthana Sutta: Initiative

Get up!
	Sit up!
What's your need for sleep?
And what sleep is there for the afflicted,
	pierced by the arrow,
	oppressed?

	Get up!
	Sit up!
Train firmly for the sake of peace,
Don't let the king of death,
— seeing you heedless —
	deceive you,
	bring you under his sway.

Cross over the attachment
to which human & heavenly beings,
remain	desiring
		tied.
Don't let the moment pass by.
Those for whom the moment is past
grieve, consigned to hell.

	Heedless is
	dust, dust
comes from heedlessness
	has heedlessness
	on its heels.
Through heedfulness & clear knowing
	you'd remove
	your own sorrow.



Rahula Sutta: Advice to Rahula

"Renouncing the five pleasures of sense that entrance and delight the mind, and in faith departing from home, become one who makes an end of suffering!

"Associate with good friends and choose a remote lodging, secluded, with little noise. Be moderate in eating. Robes, alms-food, remedies and a dwelling — do not have craving for these things; do not be one who returns to the world. [1] Practice restraint according to the Discipline, [2] and control the five sense-faculties.

"Practice mindfulness of the body and continually develop dispassion (towards it). Avoid the sign of the beautiful connected with passion; by meditating on the foul [3] cultivate a mind that is concentrated and collected.

"Meditate on the Signless and get rid of the tendency to conceit. By thoroughly understanding and destroying conceit [5] you will live in the (highest) peace."

In this manner the Lord repeatedly exhorted the Venerable Rahula.



Dhammika Sutta: Dhammika

Thus have I heard. At one time the Lord was staying near Savatthi in the Jeta Grove at Anathapindika's monastery. Now the lay-follower Dhammika with five hundred other lay-followers approached the Lord. Having drawn near and having saluted the Lord respectfully he sat down at one side. Sitting there the lay-follower Dhammika addressed the Lord as follows:

"I ask Gotama [1] of extensive wisdom this: How acting is a disciple virtuous — both the disciple who has gone from home to the homeless state and the followers who are householders? For you clearly understand the behavior [2] of the world with the devas and the final release. There is none equal to you who are skilled in seeing what is profound. You are an illustrious Awakened One (Buddha). Having investigated all knowledge and being compassionate towards beings you have announced the Dhamma, a revealer of what is hidden, of comprehensive vision, stainless, you illuminate all the worlds.

"This Dhamma, subtle and pleasing and taught so clearly by you, Lord, it is this we all wish to hear. Having been questioned, foremost Awakened One, tell us (the answer). All these bhikkhus and also the layfollowers who have come to hear the truth, let them listen to the Dhamma awakened to (anubuddham) by the Stainless One as the devas listen to the well-spoken words of Vasava." [3]

(The Lord:) "Listen to me, bhikkhus, I will teach you the ascetic practice (dhamma dhutam), the mode of living suitable for those who have gone forth. Do you all bear it in mind. One who is intent upon what is good and who is thoughtful should practice it.

"A bhikkhu should not wander about at the wrong time but should walk the village for food at the right time, as one who goes about at the wrong time is (liable to be) obsessed by attachment, therefore Awakened Ones do not walk (for alms) at the wrong time. [4] Sights, sounds, tastes, scents and bodily contacts overwhelm (the minds of) beings. Being rid of desire for these sense objects, at the right time, one may enter (the village) for the morning meal. Having duly obtained food, going back alone and sitting down in a secluded place, being inwardly thoughtful and not letting the mind go out to external objects, a bhikkhu should develop self-control.

"If he should speak with a lay-disciple, with someone else or with another bhikkhu, he should speak on the subtle Dhamma, not slandering others nor gossiping. Some set themselves up as disputants in opposition to others; those of little wisdom we do not praise; attachments bind them and they are carried away by their emotions. [5]

"Having heard the Dhamma taught by the Sugata [6] and considered it, a disciple of Him of excellent wisdom should wisely make use of food, a dwelling, a bed, a seat and water for washing the robe. But a bhikkhu should not be soiled by (clinging to) these things, as a lotus is not wetted by a drop of water.

"Now I will tell you the layman's duty. Following it a lay-disciple would be virtuous; for it is not possible for one occupied with the household life to realize the complete bhikkhu practice (dhamma).

"He should not kill a living being, nor cause it to be killed, nor should he incite another to kill. Do not injure any being, either strong or weak, in the world.

"A disciple should avoid taking anything from anywhere knowing it (to belong to another). He should not steal nor incite another to steal. He should completely avoid theft.

"A wise man should avoid unchastity as (he would avoid falling into) a pit of glowing charcoal. If unable to lead a celibate life, he should not go to another's wife.

"Having entered a royal court or a company of people he should not speak lies. He should not speak lies (himself) nor incite others to do so. He should completely avoid falsehood.

"A layman who has chosen to practice this Dhamma should not indulge in the drinking of intoxicants. He should not drink them nor encourage others to do so; realizing that it leads to madness. Through intoxication foolish people perform evil deeds and cause other heedless people to do likewise. He should avoid intoxication, this occasion for demerit, which stupefies the mind, and is the pleasure of foolish people.

Do not kill a living being;
do not take what is not given;
do not speak a lie;
do not drink intoxicants;
abstain from sexual intercourse;
do not eat food at night, at the wrong time;
do not wear flower-garlands nor use perfumes;
use the ground as a bed or sleep on a mat.
"This is called the eight-factored observance made known by the Awakened One who has reached the end of suffering.

"With a gladdened mind observe the observance day (uposatha), complete with its eight factors, on the fourteenth, fifteenth and eighth days of the (lunar) fortnight and also the special holiday of the half month. In the morning, with a pure heart and a joyful mind, a wise man, after observing the uposatha, should distribute suitable food and drink to the community of bhikkhus. He should support his mother and father as his duty and engage in lawful trading. A layman who carries this out diligently goes to the devas called "Self-radiant."



3. Mahavagga — The Great Chapter
________________________________

Pabbaja Sutta: The Going Forth

I will describe the Going Forth,
how he, the One-with-Vision, went forth,
how he reasoned and chose the Going Forth.
	"Household life is crowded,
		a realm of dust,
	while going forth
		is the open air."
Seeing this, he went forth.

On going forth,
	he avoided evil deeds in body.
	Abandoning verbal misconduct,
	he purified his livelihood.
Then he, the Buddha, went to Rajagaha,
the mountain fortress of the Magadhans,
	and wandered for alms,
endowed with all the foremost marks.
King Bimbisara, standing in his palace, saw him,
and on seeing him, consummate in marks,
said: "Look at this one, sirs.
How handsome, stately, pure!
How consummate his demeanor!
Mindful, his eyes downcast,
looking only a plow-length before him,
as one who's not from a lowly lineage:
Send the royal messengers at once
to see where this monk will go."

They — the messengers dispatched —
followed behind him.
	"Where will this monk go?
	Where will his dwelling place be?"
As he went from house to house —
well-restrained, his sense-doors guarded,
	mindful, alert —
his bowl filled quickly.
Then he, the sage, completing his alms round,
left the city, headed for Mount Pandava.
	"That's where his dwelling will be."
Seeing him go to his dwelling place,
three messengers sat down,
while one returned to tell the king.
"That monk, your majesty,
on the flank of Pandava,
sits like a tiger, a bull,
a lion in a mountain cleft."

Hearing the messenger's words,
the noble warrior king
straight away went by royal coach,
out to Mount Pandava.
Going as far as the coach would go,
he got down, went up on foot,
and on arrival sat down.
Sitting there,
he exchanged courteous greetings,
then said:
"You are young, youthful,
in the first stage of youth,
endowed with the stature & coloring
	of a noble-warrior.
You would look glorious
	in the vanguard of an army,
	arrayed with an elephant squadron.
I offer you wealth : enjoy it.
I ask your birth : inform me."

"Straight ahead, your majesty,
by the foothills of the Himalayas,
is a country consummate
in energy & wealth,
inhabited by Kosalans:
	Solar by clan,
	Sakyans by birth.
From that lineage I have gone forth,
but not in search of sensual pleasures.
Seeing the danger in sensual pleasures
— and renunciation as rest —
		I go to strive.
	That's where my heart delights."



Padhana Sutta: Exertion

To me —
	resolute in exertion
	near the river Nerañjara,
	making a great effort,
	doing jhana
	to attain rest from the yoke —

Namuci[1] came,
	speaking words of compassion:
"You are ashen, thin.
	Death is in
	your presence.
Death
has 1,000 parts of you.
Only one part
is your life.
Live, good sir!
Life is better.
		Alive,
	you can do
	acts of merit.
Your living the holy life,
performing the fire sacrifice,
will heap up much merit.
	What use is exertion to you?
Hard to follow
— the path of exertion —
hard to do, hard
to sustain."

Saying these verses,
Mara stood in the Awakened One's presence.
And to that Mara, speaking thus,
the Blessed One said this:

"Kinsman of the heedless,
	Evil One,
come here for whatever purpose:
I haven't, for merit,
even the least bit of need.
Those who have need of merit:
those are the ones
Mara's fit to address.

In me are 	conviction,
		austerity,
		persistence,
		discernment.
Why, when I'm so resolute
do you petition me
	to live?
This wind could burn up
	even river currents.
Why, when I'm resolute
shouldn't my blood dry away?
As my blood dries up
gall & phlegm dry up.
As muscles waste away,
the mind grows clearer;
mindfulness, discernment,
concentration stand
	more firm.
Staying in this way,
attaining the ultimate feeling,[2] 
the mind has no interest
in sensual passions.
	See:
	a being's
	purity!

Sensual passions are your first army.
Your second 	is called Discontent.
Your third 		is Hunger & Thirst.
Your fourth 	is called Craving.
Fifth			is Sloth & Drowsiness.
Sixth 		is called Terror.
Your seventh 	is Uncertainty.
Hypocrisy & Stubbornness, your eighth.
Gains, Offerings, Fame, & Status
	wrongly gained,
and whoever would praise self
& disparage others.

That, Namuci, is your army,
the Dark One's commando force.
A coward can't defeat it,
but one having defeated it
		gains bliss.
Do I carry muñja grass?[3] 
I spit on my life.
Death in battle woud be better for me
	than that I, defeated,
		survive.

Sinking here, they don't appear,
	some brahmans & contemplatives.
They don't know the path
by which those with good practices
				go.

Seeing the bannered force
	on all sides —
the troops, Mara
along with his mount —
I go into battle.
May they not budge me
	from
	my spot.
That army of yours,
that the world with its devas
		can't overcome,
I will smash 	with discernment —
as an unfired pot 	with a stone.

Making 	my resolve mastered,
		mindfulness well-established,
I will go about, from kingdom to kingdom,
training many disciples.
They — heedful, resolute
doing my bidding —
despite your wishes, will go
	where, having gone,
	there's no grief."
Mara:
"For seven years, I've dogged
the Blessed One's steps,
but haven't gained an opening
in the One Self-awakened
	& glorious.
A crow circled a stone
the color of fat
	— 'Maybe I've found
	something tender here.
	Maybe there's something delicious' —
but not getting anything delicious there,
the crow went away.
Like the crow attacking the rock,
I weary myself with Gotama."

As he was overcome with sorrow,
his lute fell from under his arm.
Then he, the despondent spirit,
			right there
		disappeared.



Subhasita Sutta: Well-Spoken

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying in Savatthi at Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery. There he addressed the monks, "Monks!"

"Yes, lord," the monks replied.

The Blessed One said: "Monks, speech endowed with four characteristics is well-spoken, not poorly spoken — faultless & not to be faulted by the wise. Which four? There is the case where a monk says only what it well-spoken, not what is poorly spoken; only what is just, not what is unjust; only what is endearing, not what is unendearing; only what is true, not what is false. Speech endowed with these four characteristics is well-spoken, not poorly spoken — faultless & not to be faulted by the wise."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the One Well-Gone, the Teacher, said further:

The calm say that what is well-spoken is best;
second, that one should say
		what is just, not unjust;
third, 	what's endearing, not unendearing;
fourth, 	what is true, not false.
Then Ven. Vangisa, rising from his seat, arranging his robe over one shoulder, faced the Blessed One with his hands palm-to-palm in front of his heart and said, "An inspiration has come to me, Blessed One! An inspiration has come to me, One Well-Gone!"

"Let the inspiration come to you, Vangisa," the Blessed One said.

Then Ven. Vangisa praised the Blessed One to his face with these attractive verses:

Speak only the speech
that neither torments self
nor does harm to others.
		That speech is truly well spoken.

Speak only endearing speech,
speech that is welcomed.
Speech when it brings no evil
		to others
		is pleasant.

Truth, indeed, is deathless speech:
This is an ancient principle.
The goal and the Dhamma
		— so say the calm —
are firmly established on truth.

The speech the Awakened One speaks,
for attaining Unbinding,
		rest,
for making an end
to the mass of stress:
		That is the speech unexcelled.



Salla Sutta: The Arrow

Without sign,
	unknown
— the life here of mortals —
	difficult,
	short,
	tied up with pain.
For there's no way
by which those who are born
	will not die.
Beings are subject
	to death
even when they attain
	old age.

Like ripe fruits
whose downfall, whose danger
		is falling,
so for mortals, once born,
the constant danger
		is death.

As a potter's clay vessels
	large & small
	fired & unfired
all end up broken,
	so too life
	heads to death.
Young & old
wise & foolish
rich & poor:
			all
	come under the sway of death,
			all
	have death as their end.

For those overcome by death,
	gone to the other world,
	father cannot shelter son,
	nor relatives a relative.
See: even while relatives are looking on,
		wailing heavily,
mortals are
one
	by
		one
led away
		like cows to the slaughter.

In this way is the world afflicted
	with aging & death,
and so the enlightened don't grieve,
	knowing the way of the world.

"You don't know the path
of his coming or going:
seeing neither end,
you lament in vain."

If, by lamenting,
	— confused,
	harming yourself —
any use could be gained
the prudent would do it as well.
But not by weeping & grief
do you gain peace of awareness.
		Pain
arises all the more. Your body
		is harmed.
You grow thin,
	pale,
		harming yourself
		by yourself.
Not in that way
are the dead protected.
Lamentation's in vain.

Not abandoning grief, a person
suffers all the more pain.
Bewailing one whose time is done,
you fall under the sway of grief.

Look at others
going along,
	people arriving
in line with their actions:
	falling under the sway of death,
	beings simply
	shivering here.

	For however they imagine it,
	it always turns out
	other than that.
That's the type of (their) separation.
		See the way of the world.

Even if a person lives a century
		— or more —
he's parted
from his community of relatives,
he abandons his life
right here.

So, having heard the arahant,
subduing lamentation,
seeing the dead one whose time is done,
	[think,] "I can't fetch him back." [1] 
Just as one would put out
	a burning refuge
	with water,
so does the enlightened one —
	discerning,
	skillful,
	& wise —
blow away any arisen grief,
like the wind, a bit of cotton fluff.

Seeking your own happiness,
you should pull out your own arrow:
	your own		lamentation,
			longing,
			& sorrow. [2] 
With arrow pulled out,
		independent,
attaining peace of awareness,
all grief transcended,
	griefless you are
		unbound.



Nalaka Sutta: To Nalaka

Asita the seer, in his mid-day meditation,
saw the devas of the Group of Thirty
	— exultant, ecstatic —
dressed in pure white, honoring Indra,
holding up banners, cheering wildly,
& on seeing the devas so joyful & happy,
having paid his respects, he said:

"Why is the deva community
	so wildly elated?
Why are they holding up banners
& waving them around?
Even after the war with the Asuras
	— when victory was the devas'.
	the Asuras defeated —
even then there was no excitement like this.
Seeing what marvel
are the devas so joyful?
	They shout,
	they sing,
	play music,
	clap their hands,
	dance.
So I ask you, who live on Mount Meru's summit.
Please dispel my doubt quickly, dear sirs."

"The Bodhisatta, the foremost jewel,
	unequaled,
has been born for welfare & ease
	in the human world,
in a town in the Sakyan countryside,
Lumbini.
That's why we're all so wildly elated.
He, the highest of all beings,
the ultimate person,
a bull among men, foremost of all people,
will set turning the Wheel [of Dhamma]
in the grove named after the seers,
like a strong, roaring lion,
the conqueror of beasts."

Hearing these words,
Asita quickly descended [from heaven]
and went to Suddhodana's dwelling.
There, taking a seat, he said to the Sakyans:
	"Where is the prince?
	I, too, want to see him."
The Sakyans then showed
to the seer named Asita
	their son, the prince,
	like gold aglow,
burnished by a most skillful smith
in the mouth of the furnace,
blazing with glory, flawless in color.
On seeing the prince blazing like flame,
pure like the bull of the stars
going across the sky
	— the burning sun,
	released from the clouds of autumn —
he was exultant, filled with abundant rapture.
The devas held in the sky
a many-spoked sunshade
of a thousand circles.
Gold-handled whisks
waved up & down,
but those holding the whisks & the sunshade
	couldn't be seen.
The matted-haired seer
named Dark Splendor,
seeing the boy, like an ornament of gold
on the red woolen blanket,
a white sunshade held over his head,
received him, happy & pleased.
And on receiving the bull of the Sakyans,
longingly, the master of mantras & signs
exclaimed with a confident mind:
	"This one is unsurpassed,
	the highest of the biped race."
Then, foreseeing his own imminent departure,
he, dejected, shed tears.
On seeing him weeping,
the Sakyans asked:
	"But surely there will be
	no danger for the prince?"
On seeing the Sakyans' concern
he replied, "I foresee for the prince
	no harm.
Nor will there be any danger for him.
This one isn't lowly: be assured.
	This prince will touch
	the ultimate self-awakening.
He, seeing the utmost purity,
will set rolling the Wheel of Dhamma
through sympathy for the welfare of many.
His holy life will spread far & wide.
	But as for me,
my life here has no long remainder;
my death will take place before then.
	I won't get to hear
the Dhamma of this one with the peerless role.
That's why I'm stricken,
	afflicted, & pained."

He, having brought the Sakyans
abundant rapture,
the follower of the holy life
left the inner chamber and,
out of sympathy for his nephew,
urged him on toward the Dhamma
of the one with the peerless role:
"When you hear from another the word,
	"Awakened One,"
or "Attaining self-awakening,
he lays open the path of the Dhamma,"
go there & ask him yourself.
	Follow the holy life
	under that Blessed One."

Instructed by the one
whose mind was set on his benefit,
	Such,
seeing in the future the utmost purity,
Nalaka, who had laid up a store of merit,
awaited the Victor expectantly,
guarding his senses.
On hearing word of the Victor's
turning of the foremost wheel,
	he went, he saw
the bull among seers. Confident,
he asked the foremost sage
about the highest sagacity,
now that Asita's forecast
had come to pass.

[Nalaka:]
Now that I know
Asita's words to be true,
I ask you, Gotama,
you who have gone
to the beyond of all things.
I'm intent on the homeless life;
I long for the almsround.
Tell me sage, when I ask you,
the utmost state of sagacity.

[The Buddha:]
I'll explain to you
a sagacity  hard to do,
	   hard to endure.
Come now, I'll tell you.
Be steadfast. Be firm.
Practice even-mindedness,
for in a village
there's praise & abuse.
Ward off any flaw in the heart.
Go about calmed & not haughty.
High & low things will come up
like fire-flames in a forest.
Women seduce a sage.
	May they not seduce you.[1] 
Abstaining from sexual intercourse,
abandoning various sensual pleasures,
be unopposed, unattached,
to beings moving & still.
	'As I am, so are these.
	As are these, so am I.'
Drawing the parallel to
	yourself,
neither kill nor get others to kill.
Abandoning the wants & greed
where people run-of-the-mill are stuck,
	practice with vision,
	cross over this hell.
Stomach not full,
moderate in food,
having few wants,
not being greedy,
always not hankering after desire:
	one without hankering,
	is one who's unbound.

Having gone on his almsround, the sage
should then go to the forest,
standing or taking a seat
	at the foot of a tree.
The enlightened one, intent on jhana,
should find delight in the forest,
should practice jhana at the foot of a tree,
attaining his own satisfaction.
Then, at the end of the night,
he should go to the village,
	not delighting in an invitation
	or gift from the village.
Having gone to the village,
the sage should not carelessly
go among families.
Cutting off chatter,
he shouldn't utter a scheming word.
	'I got something,
	that's fine.
	I got nothing,
	that's good.'
Being such with regard to both,
he returns to the very same tree.
Wandering with his bowl in hand
	— not dumb,
	but seemingly dumb —
he shouldn't despise a piddling gift
nor disparage the giver.

High & low are the practices
proclaimed by the contemplative.
They don't go twice to the further shore.
This [Unbinding] isn't sensed only once.[2] 

In one who has no attachment —
the monk who has cut the stream,
abandoning what is
& isn't a duty —
	no fever is found.

I'll explain to you
sagacity:   be like a razor's edge.
Pressing tongue against palate,
	restrain your stomach.
Neither be lazy in mind,
nor have many thoughts.
Be committed to taintlessness,
	independent,
having the holy life as your aim.
Train in    solitude
	   & the contemplative's task,
	Solitude
	is called
	sagacity.
Alone, you truly delight
	& shine in the ten directions.

On hearing the fame of the enlightened
	— those who practice jhana,
	relinquishing sensual pleasures —
my disciple should foster
	all the more
	conviction & conscience.

Know from the rivers
in clefts & in crevices:
those in small channels flow
	       noisily,
	the great
	flow silent.
Whatever's not full
	makes noise.
Whatever is full
	is quiet.
The fool is like a half-empty pot;
one who is wise, a full lake.
A contemplative who speaks a great deal
	endowed with meaning:
	knowing, he teaches the Dhamma,
	knowing, he speaks a great deal.
But he who,
	knowing, is restrained,
	knowing, doesn't speak a great deal:
he is a sage
	worthy of sagehood;
he is a sage,
	his sagehood attained.



Dvayatanupassana Sutta: The Contemplation of Dualities

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi in the Eastern Monastery, the palace of Migara's mother. Now on that occasion — the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, the full-moon night — the Blessed One was sitting in the open air surrounded by the community of monks. Surveying the silent community of monks, he addressed them: "Monks, if there are any who ask, 'Your listening to teachings that are skillful, noble, leading onward, going to self-awakening is a prerequisite for what?' they should be told, 'For the sake of knowing qualities of dualities as they actually are.' 'What duality are you speaking about?' 'This is stress. This is the origination of stress': this is one contemplation. 'This is the cessation of stress. This is the path of practice leading to the cessation of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Those who don't discern stress,
what brings stress into play,
& where it totally stops,
	without trace;
who don't know the path,
the way to the stilling of stress:
	lowly
in their awareness-release
& discernment-release,
	incapable
of making an end,
	they're headed
	to birth & aging.

But those who discern stress,
what brings stress into play,
& where it totally stops,
	without trace;
who discern the path,
the way to the stilling of stress:
	consummate
in their awareness-release
& discernment-release,
	capable
of making an end,
	they aren't headed
	   to birth & aging.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from acquisition as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very acquisition, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


The manifold stresses
that come into play in the world,
come from acquisition as their cause.
Anyone not knowing [this]
creates acquisition.
The fool, he comes to stress
	again & again.
Therefore, discerning [this],
you shouldn't create acquisition
as you contemplate birth
as what brings stress
	into play.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from ignorance as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very ignorance, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Those who journey the wandering-on
through birth & death, again & again,
	in this state here
	or anywhere else,
that destination is simply through ignorance.
This ignorance is a great delusion
whereby they have wandered-on
a long, long time.
While beings immersed in clear knowing
don't go to further becoming.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from fabrication as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very fabrication, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Any stress that comes into play
is all from fabrication
	as a requisite
	condition.
With the cessation of fabrication,
	there is no stress
	coming into play.
Knowing this drawback —
that stress comes from fabrication
	as a requisite
	condition —
with the tranquilizing of all fabrication,
with the stopping of perception:
	that's how there is
	the ending of stress.
Knowing this as it actually is,
an attainer-of-wisdom
	sees rightly.
	Seeing rightly,
	the wise —
overcoming the fetter of Mara —
	go to no further becoming.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from consciousness as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very consciousness, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Any stress that comes into play
is all from consciousness
	as a requisite
	condition.
With the cessation of consciousness,
	there is no stress
	coming into play.
Knowing this drawback —
that stress comes from consciousness
	as a requisite
	condition —
with the stilling of consciousness, the monk
	free from hunger
	is totally unbound.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from contact as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very contact, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


For those overcome by contact,
flowing along in the stream of becoming,
following a miserable path,
	the ending of fetters
	is far away.
While those who comprehend contact,
delighting in stilling through discernment,
	they, by breaking through contact,
	free from hunger,
	are totally unbound.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from feeling as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very feeling, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Knowing that
whatever is felt —
pleasure, pain,
neither pleasure nor pain,
within or without —
is stressful,
deceptive,
dissolving,
seeing its passing away
at each contact,
	       each
	       contact,
he knows it right there:
	with just the ending of feeling,
	there is no stress
	coming into play.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from craving as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very craving, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


With craving his companion, a man
wanders on a long, long time.
Neither in this state here
nor anywhere else
does he go beyond
	the wandering- on.
Knowing this drawback —
that craving brings stress into play —
free from craving,
devoid of clinging,
mindful, the monk
lives the wandering life.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from clinging as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very clinging, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


From clinging as a requisite condition
	comes becoming.
One who has come into being
	goes
	to stress.
	There is death
for one who is born.
This is the coming into play
	of stress.
Thus, with the ending of clinging, the wise
	seeing rightly,
	directly knowing
	the ending of birth,
go to no further becoming.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from disturbance as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very disturbance, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Any stress that comes into play
is all from disturbance
	as a requisite
	condition.
With the cessation of disturbance,
	there is no stress
	coming into play.
Knowing this drawback —
that stress comes from disturbance
	as a requisite
	condition —
with the relinquishing
of all disturbance,
a monk released in non-disturbance,
his craving for becoming    crushed,
his mind at peace,
his wandering-on in birth totally ended:
	he has no further becoming.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from nutriment as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of that very nutriment, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Any stress that comes into play
is all from nutriment
	as a requisite
	condition.
With the cessation of nutriment,
	there is no stress
	coming into play.
Knowing this drawback —
that stress comes from nutriment
	as a requisite
	condition —
comprehending all nutriment,
independent     of all nutriment,
rightly seeing
freedom from disease
through the total ending
of fermentations,
	judiciously associating,
	a judge,
he, an attainer-of-wisdom,
goes beyond judgment,
	beyond classification.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever stress comes into play is all from what is perturbed as a requisite condition': this is one contemplation. 'From the remainderless fading & cessation of what is perturbed, there is no coming into play of stress': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Any stress that comes into play
is all from what is perturbed
	as a requisite
	condition.
With the cessation of what is perturbed,
	there is no stress
	coming into play.
Knowing this drawback —
that stress comes from what is perturbed
	as a requisite
	condition —
the monk thus renouncing perturbance,
putting a stop to fabrications,
free from perturbance, free
	from clinging,
mindful he lives
the wandering life.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'For one who is dependent, there is wavering': this is one contemplation. 'One who is independent doesn't waver': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


One who's independent
doesn't
	waver.
One who's dependent,
clinging
	to this state here
	or anywhere else,
doesn't go beyond
	the wandering-on.
Knowing this drawback —
	the great danger in
	dependencies —
in-
dependent,
free from clinging,
	mindful the monk
	lives the wandering life.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Formless phenomena are more peaceful than forms': this is one contemplation. 'Cessation is more peaceful than formless phenomena': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


Those beings headed to forms,
and those standing in the formless,
with no knowledge of cessation,
return to further becoming.

But, comprehending form,
not taking a stance in formless things,
those released in cessation
are people who've left death        behind.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever is considered as "This is true" by the world with its devas, Maras, & Brahmas, with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, is rightly seen as it actually is with right discernment by the noble ones as "This is false"': this is one contemplation. 'Whatever is considered as "This is false" by the world with its devas, Maras, & Brahmas, with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, is rightly seen as it actually is with right discernment by the noble ones as "This is true"': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


See the world, together with its devas,
conceiving not-self to be self.
Entrenched in name & form,
they conceive that 'This is true.'
In whatever terms they conceive it
it turns into something other than that,
	and that's what's false about it:
	changing,
it's deceptive by nature.
Undeceptive by nature
is Unbinding:
that the noble ones know
	       as true.
They, through breaking through
	       to the truth,
free from hunger,
are totally unbound.
"Now, if there are any who ask, 'Would there be the right contemplation of dualities in yet another way?' they should be told, 'There would.' 'How would that be?' 'Whatever is considered as "This is bliss" by the world with its devas, Maras, & Brahmas, with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, is rightly seen as it actually is with right discernment by the noble ones as "This is stressful"': this is one contemplation. 'Whatever is considered as "This is stressful" by the world with its devas, Maras, & Brahmas, with its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, is rightly seen as it actually is with right discernment by the noble ones as "This is bliss"': this is a second contemplation. For a monk rightly contemplating this duality in this way — heedful, ardent, & resolute — one of two fruits can be expected: either gnosis right here & now, or — if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance — non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One Well-gone, the Teacher, said further:


All sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
tactile sensations, & ideas
that are    welcome,
	       appealing,
	       agreeable —
as long as they're said
	to exist,
are supposed by the world
together with its devas
	       to be bliss.
	   But when they cease,
	   they're supposed by them
	       to be stress.
The stopping of self-identity
is viewed by the noble ones
	   as bliss.
This is contrary
to what's seen
by the world as a whole.

What others say is blissful,
the noble ones say is stress.
What others say is stressful,
the noble know as bliss.
See the Dhamma, hard to understand!
	Here those who don't know
	are confused.
For those who are veiled,
	it's   darkness,
	           blindness
	for those who don't see.
But for the good it is blatant,
like light
for those who see.
Though in their very presence,
they don't understand it —
dumb animals, unadept in the Dhamma.
It's not easy
for those overcome
	by passion for becoming,
flowing along
	in the stream of becoming,
falling under Mara's sway,
	to wake up
	to this Dhamma.

Who, apart from the noble,
is worthy to wake up
to this state? —
	the state that,
	through rightly knowing it,
	they're free from fermentation,
	       totally
	               unbound.
That is what the Blessed One said. Gratified, the monks delighted in the Blessed One's words. And while this explanation was being given, the minds of 60 monks, through lack of clinging, were fully released from fermentation.



4. Atthaka Vagga — The Octet Chapter
____________________________________

Kama Sutta: Sensual Pleasure

If one, longing for sensual pleasure,
	achieves it, yes,
he's enraptured at heart.
The mortal gets what he wants.
But if for that person
	— longing, desiring —
the pleasures diminish,
	he's shattered,
as if shot with an arrow.

Whoever avoids sensual desires
— as he would, with his foot,
the head of a snake —
goes beyond, mindful,
this attachment in the world.

A man who is greedy
	for fields, land, gold,
	cattle, horses,
	servants, employees,
	women, relatives,
	many sensual pleasures,
is overpowered with weakness
and trampled by trouble,
for pain invades him
as water, a cracked boat.

So one, always mindful,
should avoid sensual desires.
	Letting them go,
he'd cross over the flood
like one who, having bailed out the boat,
	has reached the far shore.



Guhatthaka Sutta: The Cave of the Body

Staying attached to the cave,
covered heavily over,[1] 
a person sunk in confusion
is far from seclusion —
for	sensual pleasures
	sensual desires[2] 
in the world
	are not lightly let go.

Those chained by desire,
bound by becoming's allure,
aren't easily released
for there's no liberation by others.
Intent, in front or behind,[3] 
on hunger for sensual pleasures
here or before —
	greedy
for sensual pleasures,
busy, deluded, ungenerous,
entrenched in the out-of-tune way,[4] 
they — impelled into pain — lament:
	"What will we be
	when we pass on from here?"

So a person should train
	right here & now.
Whatever you know
as out-of-tune in the world,
don't, for its sake, act out-of-tune,
for that life, the enlightened say,
	is short.

	I see them,
in the world, floundering around,
people immersed in craving
for states of becoming.
Base people moan in the mouth of death,
their craving, for states of becoming & not-,[5] 
	unallayed.

	See them,
floundering in their sense of mine,
like fish in the puddles
of a dried-up stream —
and, seeing this,
live with no mine,
not forming attachment
for states of becoming.
	Subdue desire
for both sides,[6] 
comprehending[7] sensory contact,
	with no greed.

Doing nothing for which
he himself
would rebuke himself,
the enlightened person doesn't adhere
	to what's seen,
	to what's heard.
Comprehending perception,
he'd cross over the flood —
the sage not stuck
on possessions.
Then, with arrow removed,
living heedfully, he longs for neither —
	this world,
	the next.



Dutthatthaka Sutta: Corrupted

There are some who dispute
	corrupted at heart,
and those who dispute
	their hearts set on truth,
but a sage doesn't enter
a dispute that's arisen,
which is why he is
	nowhere constrained.

Now, how would one
	led on by desire,
	entrenched in his likes,
	forming his own conclusions,
overcome his own views?
He'd dispute in line
with the way that he knows.

Whoever boasts to others, unasked,
of his practices, precepts,
is, say the skilled,
ignoble by nature —
	he who speaks of himself
	of his own accord.

But a monk at peace,
	fully unbound in himself,
who doesn't boast of his precepts
	— "That's how I am" —
he, say the skilled,
is noble by nature —
	he with no vanity
	with regard to the world.

One whose doctrines aren't clean —
fabricated, formed, given preference
when he sees it to his own advantage —
	relies on a peace
	dependent
	on what can be shaken.

Because entrenchments[1] in views
aren't easily overcome
when considering what's grasped
among doctrines,
	that's why
a person embraces or rejects a doctrine —
	in light of these very
	entrenchments.

Now, one who is cleansed[2] 
	has no preconceived view
about states of becoming
				or not-
	anywhere in the world.
Having abandoned conceit[3] & illusion,
by what means would he go?[4] 
		He isn't involved.

For one who's involved
	gets into disputes
	over doctrines,
but how — in connection with what — [5] 
would you argue
with one uninvolved?
	He has nothing
embraced or rejected,[6] 
has sloughed off every view
	right here — every one.



Suddhatthaka Sutta: Pure

"I see the pure, the supreme,
	free from disease.
It's in connection
with what's seen
that a person's purity
		is."[1] 

Understanding thus,
having known the "supreme,"
& remaining focused
	on purity,
one falls back on that knowledge.
If it's in connection
with what is seen
that a person's purity is,
or if stress is abandoned
in connection with knowledge,
then a person with acquisitions
	is purified
in connection with something else,[2] 
	for his view betrays that
	in the way he asserts it.

No brahman[3] 
says purity
comes in connection
with anything else.
Unsmeared with regard
to what's 	seen, heard, sensed,
		precepts or practices,
		merit or evil,
not creating
anything here,
he's let go
	of what he had embraced.[4] 

Abandoning what's first,
they depend on	what's next.[5] 
Following distraction,
they don't cross over attachment.
They embrace & reject
	— like a monkey releasing a branch
		to seize at another[6] —
a person undertaking practices on his own,
goes high & low,
latched onto perception.
But having clearly known
through vedas,[7] having encountered
	the Dhamma,
one of profound discernment
	doesn't go
	high & low.

He's enemy-free[8] 
with regard to 	all things
seen, heard, or sensed.
By whom, with what,[9] 
should he
be pigeonholed
here in the world?
	— one who has seen in this way,
	who goes around
				open.[10] 

They don't conjure, don't yearn,
don't proclaim "utter purity."
Untying the tied-up knot of grasping,
they don't form a desire for
	any
	thing
at all in the world.

The brahman
gone beyond territories,[11] 
has nothing that
— on knowing or seeing —
he's grasped.
Unimpassionate 	for passion,
not impassioned 	for dis-,[12] 
he has nothing here
that he's grasped as supreme.



Paramatthaka Sutta: Supreme

When dwelling on views
	as "supreme,"
a person makes them
the utmost thing
in the world,
&, from that, calls
all others inferior
and so he's not free
from disputes.
When he sees his advantage
in what's seen, heard, sensed,
or in precepts & practices,
seizing it there
he sees all else
			as inferior.

That, too, say the skilled,
is a binding knot: that
in dependence on which
you regard another
		as inferior.
So a monk shouldn't be dependent
	on what's seen, heard, or sensed,
	or on precepts & practices;
nor should he conjure a view in the world
	in connection with knowledge
	or precepts & practices;
shouldn't take himself
	to be "equal";
shouldn't think himself
	inferior or superlative.

Abandoning 	what he had embraced,
abandoning 		self,[1] 
	not clinging,
he doesn't make himself dependent
even in connection with knowledge;
doesn't follow a faction
among those who are split;
doesn't fall back
on any view whatsoever.

One who isn't inclined
toward either side
	— becoming or not-,
	here or beyond —
who has no entrenchment
when considering what's grasped among doctrines,
hasn't the least
preconceived perception
with regard to what's seen, heard, or sensed.
By whom, with what,
should he be pigeonholed
here in the world?
	— this brahman
	who hasn't adopted views.

They don't conjure, don't yearn,
don't adhere even to doctrines.

A brahman not led
by precepts or practices,
gone to the beyond
	— Such —
	doesn't fall back.



Jara Sutta: Old Age

How short this life!
You die this side of a century,
but even if you live past,
	you die of old age.

People grieve
for what they see as mine,
for 	nothing possessed is constant,
	nothing is constantly possessed.[1] 
Seeing this separation
	simply as it is,
one shouldn't follow the household life.

At death a person abandons
what he construes as mine.
Realizing this, the wise
shouldn't incline
to be devoted to mine.

Just as a man doesn't see,
	on awakening,
what he met in a dream,
even so he doesn't see,
when they are dead
	— their time done —
those he held dear.

When they are seen & heard,
people are called by this name or that,
but only the name remains
to be pointed to
	when they are dead.

Grief, lamentation, & selfishness
	are not let go
	by those greedy for mine,
so sages
	letting go of possessions,
	seeing the Secure,
		go wandering forth.

A monk, living 		withdrawn,
enjoying a dwelling 	secluded:
	they say it's congenial for him
	he who wouldn't, in any realm,
		display self.

Everywhere
	the sage
		independent
holds nothing dear or undear.

	In him
lamentation & selfishness,
like water on a white lotus,
	do not adhere.

As a water bead on a lotus leaf,
as water on a red lily,
	does not adhere,

	so the sage
	does not adhere
to the seen, the heard, or the sensed;

	for, cleansed,
	he doesn't construe
	in connection
with the seen, the heard, or the sensed.

	In no other way
does he wish for purity,
for he neither takes on passion
	nor puts it away.



Tissa Metteyya Sutta: Tissa Metteyya

"Tell the danger, dear sir,
for one given over
to sexual intercourse.
Having heard your teaching,
we'll train in seclusion."

The Buddha:
"In one given over
to sexual intercourse,
the teaching's confused
and he practices wrongly:
	this is ignoble
	in him.
Whoever once went alone,
but then resorts
to sexual intercourse
	— like a carriage out of control —
is called vile in the world,
a person run-of-the-mill.
His earlier honor & dignity:
		lost.
Seeing this,
he should train himself
to abandon sexual intercourse.

Overcome by resolves,
	he broods
like a miserable wretch.
Hearing the scorn of others,
	he's chagrined.
He makes weapons,
attacked by the words of others.
This, for him, is a great entanglement.
	He
	sinks
	into lies.

	They thought him wise
when he committed himself
to the life alone,
but now that he's given
to sexual intercourse
	they declare him a fool.

Seeing these drawbacks, the sage
	here — before & after —
stays firm in the life alone;
doesn't resort to sexual intercourse;
would train himself
in seclusion —
		this, for the noble ones, is
		supreme.
He wouldn't, because of that,
think himself
better than others:
He's on the verge
	of Unbinding.

People enmeshed
in sensual pleasures,
envy him: 	free,
		a sage
leading his life
unconcerned for sensual pleasures
	— one who's crossed over the flood."



Pasura Sutta: To Pasura

"Only here is there purity"
	— that's what they say —
"No other doctrines are pure"
	— so they say.
Insisting that what they depend on is good,
they are deeply entrenched in their personal truths.

Seeking controversy, they plunge into an assembly,
regarding one another as fools.
Relying on others' authority,
they speak in debate.
Desiring praise, they claim to be skilled.

Engaged in disputes in the midst of the assembly,
	— anxious, desiring praise —
the one defeated is
	chagrined.
Shaken with criticism, he seeks for an opening.

He whose doctrine is [judged as] demolished,
	defeated, by those judging the issue:
He laments, he grieves — the inferior exponent.
	"He beat me," he mourns.

These disputes have arisen among contemplatives.
	In them are 		elation,
				dejection.
Seeing this, one should abstain from disputes,
	for they have no other goal
	than the gaining of praise.

He who is praised there
	for expounding his doctrine
	in the midst of the assembly,
laughs on that account & grows haughty,
	attaining his heart's desire.

That haughtiness will be his grounds for vexation,
	for he'll speak in pride & conceit.
Seeing this, one should abstain from debates.
No purity is attained by them, say the skilled.

Like a strong man nourished on royal food,
you go about, roaring, searching out an opponent.
Wherever the battle is,
	go there, strong man.
As before, there's none here.

Those who dispute, taking hold of a view,
saying, "This, and this only, is true,"
	those you can talk to.
Here there is nothing —
	no confrontation
	at the birth of disputes.

Among those who live above confrontation
	not pitting view against view,
	whom would you gain as opponent, Pasura,
among those here
who are grasping no more?

So here you come,
	conjecturing,
your mind conjuring
	viewpoints.
You're paired off with a pure one
	and so cannot proceed.



Magandiya Sutta: To Magandiya

[Magandiya offers his daughter to the Buddha, who replies:]
On seeing [the daughters of Mara]
— Discontent, Craving, & Passion —
there wasn't even the desire for sex.
So what would I want with this,
filled with urine & excrement?
I wouldn't want to touch it
	even with my foot.

Magandiya:
If you don't want
this gem of a woman, coveted
by many kings,
then for what sort of viewpoint,
precept, practice, life,
attainment of [further] becoming
do you argue?

The Buddha:
'I argue for this'
doesn't occur to one
when considering what's grasped
	among doctrines.
Looking for what is		ungrasped
with regard to views,
and detecting inner peace,
	I saw.

Magandiya:
Sage, you speak
without grasping
at any preconceived judgments.
This 'inner peace':
what does it mean?
	How is it,
by an enlightened person,
	proclaimed?

The Buddha:
He doesn't speak of purity
in connection with 	view,
				learning,
				knowledge,
				precept or practice.
Nor is it found by a person
through lack of view,
		of learning,
		of knowledge,
		of precept or practice.[1] 
Letting these go, without grasping,
	at peace,
	independent,
one wouldn't long for becoming.

Magandiya:
If he doesn't speak of purity
in connection with 	view,
				learning,
				knowledge,
				precept or practice.
and it isn't found by a person
through lack of view,
		of learning,
		of knowledge,
		of precept or practice,
it seems to me that this teaching's
	confused,
for some assume a purity
	in terms of
	— by means of —
		a view.

The Buddha:
Asking questions
dependent on view,
you're confused
by what you have grasped.
And so you don't glimpse
	even
the slightest
	notion
[of what I am saying].
That's why you think
	it's confused.

Whoever construes
	'equal,'
	'superior,' or
	'inferior,'
by that he'd dispute;
whereas to one unaffected
by these three,
	'equal,'
	'superior,'
do not occur.

Of what would the brahman say 'true'
			or 'false,'
disputing with whom:
he in whom 'equal,' 'unequal' are not.

Having abandoned home,
living free from society,
	the sage
in villages
creates no intimacies.
Rid of sensual passions, free
from yearning,
he wouldn't engage with people
in quarrelsome debate.[2] 

Those things
aloof from which
he should go about in the world:
the great one
wouldn't take them up
& argue for them.

As the prickly lotus
is unsmeared by water & mud,
so the sage,
	an exponent of peace,
		without greed,
	is unsmeared by sensuality &
		the world.

An attainer-of-wisdom isn't measured
				made proud[3] 
		by views or what's thought,
		for he isn't fashioned of them.
He wouldn't be led
by action,[4] learning;
doesn't reach a conclusion
	in any entrenchments.

For one dispassionate toward perception
	there are no ties;
for one released by discernment,
		no
	delusions.
Those who grasp at perceptions & views
go about butting their heads
	in the world.



Purabheda Sutta: Before the Break-up of the Body

"Seeing how,
behaving how,
is one said to be
	at peace?
Gotama, tell me about
	— when asked about —
	the ultimate person."

The Buddha:

"Free from craving
before the break-up
[of the body],
independent
	of before
	& the end,[1] 
not classified in between,[2] 
no yearning is his.

Un-	angered,
un-	startled,
un-	boastful,
un-	anxious,
giving counsel unruffled,
he is a sage,
	his speech
	under control.

Free from attachment
with regard to the future,
not sorrowing
over the past,
he sees seclusion
in the midst of sensory contacts.[3] 
He can't be led
in terms of views.[4] 

	Withdrawn, un-
	deceitful, not
	stingy, not
	miserly, not
	insolent, in-
	offensive,
	he doesn't engage in
	divisive speech.

Not intoxicated with enticements,
nor given to pride,
he's gentle, quick-witted,
beyond conviction & dispassion.[5] 

Not in hopes of material gain
does he take on the training;
when without material gain
he isn't upset.

Unobstructed 	by craving,
he doesn't 		through craving[6] 
	hunger for flavors.

Equanimous — always — mindful,
he doesn't conceive himself as
equal,
	superior,
		inferior,
			in the world.
	No swellings of pride
	are his.

Whose dependencies
don't exist
when, on knowing the Dhamma,
he's in-
dependent;
in whom no craving is found
for becoming or not-:
he is said
	to be at peace,
		un-intent
		on sensual pleasures,
	with nothing at all
	to tie him down:
one who's crossed over attachment.

He has no 	children
		cattle,
		fields,
		land.
In him you can't pin down
	what's embraced
	or rejected.[7] 
He has no yearning
for that which people run-of-the-mill
or brahmans & contemplatives
might blame —
	which is why
he is unperturbed
with regard to their words.

His greed gone,
not miserly,
	the sage
doesn't speak of himself
as among those who are higher,
	equal,
or lower.
	He,
conjuring-free,
	doesn't submit
	to conjuring,
	to the cycling of time.[8] 

For whom
nothing in the world
is his own,
	who doesn't grieve
	over what is not,
		who doesn't enter into
			doctrines
			phenomena:[9] 
he is said
	to be
	at peace."



Kalaha-vivada Sutta: Quarrels & Disputes

"From where have there arisen
quarrels, disputes,
lamentation, sorrows, along with selfishness,
conceit & pride, along with divisiveness?
From where have they arisen?
	Please tell me."
"From what is dear
there have arisen
quarrels, disputes,
lamentation, sorrows, along with selfishness,
conceit & pride, along with divisiveness.
Tied up with selfishness
are quarrels & disputes.
In the arising of disputes
is divisiveness."

"Where is the cause
of things dear in the world,
along with the greeds that go about in the world?
And where is the cause
of the hopes & fulfillments
for the sake of a person's next life?"

"Desires are the cause
of things dear in the world,
along with the greeds that go about in the world.
And it too is the cause
of the hopes & fulfillments
for the sake of a person's next life."

"Now where is the cause
of desire in the world?
And from where have there arisen
decisions, anger, lies, & perplexity,
and all the qualities
described by the Contemplative?"

"What they call
'appealing' &
'unappealing'
in the world:
in dependence on that
	desire arises.
Having seen becoming & not-
with regard to forms,
a person gives rise to decisions in the world;
anger, lies, & perplexity:
these qualities, too, when that pair exists.
A person perplexed
should train for the path of knowledge,
for it's in having known
that the Contemplative has spoken
	of qualities/dhammas."[1] 

"Where is the cause
of appealing & un-?
When what isn't
do they not exist?
And whatever is meant
by becoming & not- :
	tell me,
	Where is its cause?"

"Contact is the cause
of appealing & un-.
When contact isn't
they do not exist.
And whatever is meant
by becoming & not- :
	this too is its cause."

"Now where is the cause
of contact in the world,
and from where have graspings,
			possessions, arisen?
When what isn't
does mine-ness not exist.
When what has disappeared
do contacts not touch?"

"Conditioned by name & form
		is contact.
In longing do graspings,
		possessions have their cause.
When longing isn't
mine-ness does not exist.
When forms have disappeared
contacts don't touch."

"For one arriving at what
does form disappear?
How do pleasure & pain disappear?
	Tell me this.
		My heart is set
		on knowing how
		they disappear."

"One not percipient of perceptions
not percipient of aberrant perceptions,
not unpercipient,
nor percipient of what's disappeared:[2] 
	for one arriving at this,
		form disappears —
	for objectification-classifications[3] 
	have their cause in perception."

"What we have asked, you have told us.
We ask one more thing.
Please tell it.
Do some of the wise
say that just this much is the utmost,
the purity of the spirit[4] is here?
Or do they say
that it's other than this?"

"Some of the wise
say that just this much is the utmost,
the purity of the spirit is here.
But some of them,
who say they are skilled,
say it's the moment
with no clinging remaining.

	Knowing,
'Having known, they still are dependent,'[5] 
the sage, ponders dependencies.
On knowing them, released,
he doesn't get into disputes,
doesn't meet with becoming & not-
		: he's enlightened."



Cula-viyuha Sutta: The Lesser Array

"Dwelling on
their own views,
quarreling,
different skilled people say:
'Whoever knows this, understands Dhamma.
Whoever rejects this, is
		imperfect.'
Thus quarreling, they dispute:
'My opponent's a fool & unskilled.'
Which of these statements is true
when all of them say they are skilled?"
"If, in not accepting
an opponent's doctrine,
one's a fool, a beast of inferior discernment,
then all are fools
of inferior discernment —
all of these
who dwell on their views.
But if, in siding with a view,
one's cleansed,
with discernment made pure,
	intelligent, skilled,
then none of them
are of inferior discernment,
for all of them
have their own views.

I don't say, 'That's how it is,'
the way fools say to one another.
They each make out their views to be true
and so regard their opponents as fools."

"What some say is true
— 'That's how it is' —
others say is 'falsehood, a lie.'
Thus quarreling, they dispute.
Why can't contemplatives
say one thing & the same?"

	"The truth is one,[1] 
	there is no second
about which a person who knows it
would argue with one who knows.
Contemplatives promote
their various personal truths,
that's why they don't say
one thing & the same."

"But why do they say
various truths,
those who say they are skilled?
Have they learned many various truths
or do they follow conjecture?"

"Apart from their perception
there are no
	many
	various
	constant truths
	in the world.[2] 
Preconceiving conjecture
with regard to views,
they speak of a pair: true
	& false.
Dependent on what's seen,
			heard,
			& sensed,
dependent on precepts & practices,
one shows disdain [for others].
Taking a stance on his decisions,
praising himself, he says,
'My opponent's a fool & unskilled.'
	That by which
he regards his opponents as fools
	is that by which
		he says he is skilled.
Calling himself skilled
he despises another
who speaks the same way.

Agreeing on a view gone out of bounds,
drunk with conceit, thinking himself perfect,
he has consecrated, with his own mind,
	himself
	as well as his view.

If, by an opponent's word,
one's inferior,
		the opponent's
of inferior discernment as well.
But if, by one's own word
one's an attainer-of-wisdom, enlightened,
	no one
among contemplative's
	a fool.

'Those who teach a doctrine other than this
are lacking in purity,
	imperfect.'
That's what the many sectarians say,
for they're smitten with passion
for their own views.
	'Only here is there purity,'
	that's what they say.
	'In no other doctrine
	is purity,' they say.
That's how the many sectarians
are entrenched,
speaking firmly there
concerning their own path.
Speaking firmly concerning your own path,
what opponent here would you take as a fool?
You'd simply bring quarrels on yourself
if you said your opponent's a fool
with an impure doctrine.

Taking 	a stance on your decisions,
		& yourself as your measure,
you dispute further down
into the world.

But one who's abandoned
	all decisions
creates in the world
quarrels no more."



Maha-viyuha Sutta: The Great Array

"Those who, dwelling on views,
dispute, saying, 'Only this is true':
	do they all incur blame,
	or also earn praise there?"

	"[The praise:] It's such a little thing,
	not at all appeasing.[1] 
	I speak of two fruits of dispute;
	and seeing this, you shouldn't dispute —
		seeing the state
		where there's no dispute
		as secure.
	One who knows
	doesn't get involved
	in whatever are
		commonplace
		conventional
	views.
	One who is uninvolved:
	when he's forming no preference
	for what's seen, for what's heard,
	why would he get
	involved?

	Those for whom precepts
	are ultimate
	say that purity's
	a matter of self-restraint.
	Undertaking a practice,
	they devote themselves to it:
	'Let's train just in this,
	and then there would be purity.'
	Those who say they are skilled
	are [thus] led on to becoming.
	But if one of them falls
	from his precepts or practice,
		he trembles,
	having failed in his actions.
	He hopes for, longs for, purity,
	like a lost caravan leader
		far from home.

	But one who's abandoned
		precepts & practices[2] 
			— all —
	things that are blamable, blameless,[3] 
	not hoping for 'pure or impure,'[4] 
	would live in compassion & peace,
			without taking up peace,[5] 
	detached.

	Dependent
	on taboos, austerities,
	or what's seen, heard, or sensed,
	they speak of purity
	through wandering further on
	through becoming & not-,
	their craving not gone
	for becoming & not-.[6] 
	For one who aspires has longings
	& trembling with regard to preconceptions.
	But one who here
	has no passing away & arising:
	Why would he tremble?
	For what would he long?"

"The teaching some say is 'supreme,'
is the very one others call 'lowly.'
Which statement is true
when all of these claim to be skilled?"

	"They say their own teaching is perfect
	while the doctrine of others is lowly.
	Thus quarreling, they dispute,
	each saying his agreed-on opinion
			is true.
	If something, because of an opponent's say-so,
		were lowly,
	then none among teachings would be
		superlative,
	for many say
	that another's teaching's inferior
	when firmly asserting their own.
	If their worship of their teaching were true,
	in line with the way they praise their own path,
		then all doctrines
		would be true —
	for purity's theirs, according to each.

	The brahman has nothing
	led by another,
	when considering what's grasped
	among doctrines.
	Thus he has gone
	beyond disputes,
	for he doesn't regard as best
		the knowledge of a teaching,
		any other mental state.[7] 

	'I know. I see. That's just how it is!' —
	Some believe purity's in terms of view.
		But even if a person has seen,
		what good does it do him?
	Having slipped past,
	they speak of purity
	in connection with something
			or somebody 	else.
	A person, in seeing,
	sees name & form.
	Having seen, he'll know
	only these things.
	No matter if he's seen little, a lot,
	the skilled don't say purity's
	in connection with that.

	A person entrenched in his teachings,
	honoring a preconceived view,
	isn't easy to discipline.
	Whatever he depends on
	he describes it as lovely,
	says 	that it's purity,
		that there he saw truth.

	The brahman, evaluating,
	isn't involved with conjurings,
	doesn't follow views,
	isn't tied even to knowledge.[8] 
	And on knowing
	whatever's conventional, commonplace,
	he remains equanimous:
		'That's what others hold onto.'

	Having released the knots
	that tie him down,
	the sage here in the world
	doesn't follow a faction
	when disputes have arisen.
	At peace among those not at peace,
	he's equanimous, doesn't hold on:
		'That's what others hold onto.'

	Giving up old fermentations,
	not forming new,
	neither pursuing desire,
	nor entrenched in his teachings,
	he's totally released
	from viewpoints,
		enlightened.

	He doesn't adhere to the world,
	is without self-rebuke;
	is enemy-free[9] 
	with regard to all things
	seen, heard, or sensed.

	His burden laid down,
	the sage totally released

		is improper / is free from conjuring
		hasn't stopped / isn't impassioned
	isn't worth wanting / doesn't
						desire,"

				the Blessed One said.



Tuvataka Sutta: Quickly

"I ask the kinsman of the Sun, the great seer,
about seclusion & the state of peace.
Seeing in what way is a monk unbound,
clinging to nothing in the world?"
"He should put an entire stop
to the root of objectification-classifications:
	'I am the thinker.'[1] 
He should train, always mindful,
to subdue any craving inside him.
Whatever truth he may know,
	within or without,
he shouldn't get entrenched
in connection with it,
	for that isn't called
	Unbinding by the good.
He shouldn't, because of it, think himself
	better,
			lower, or
		equal.
Touched by contact in various ways,
he shouldn't keep conjuring self.
Stilled right within,
a monk shouldn't seek peace from another
			from anything else.
For one stilled right within,
there's nothing embraced,
	so how rejected?[2] 

As in the middle of the sea
	it is still,
with no waves upwelling,
so the monk — unperturbed, still —
should not swell himself
		anywhere."

"He whose eyes are open has described
the Dhamma he's witnessed,
subduing danger.
Now tell us, sir, the practice:
the code of discipline & concentration."

"One shouldn't be careless with his eyes,
should close his ears to village-talk,
shouldn't hunger for flavors,
or view anything in the world
	as mine.
When touched by contact
he shouldn't lament,
shouldn't covet anywhere any
	states of becoming,
or tremble at terrors.
When gaining food & drink,
		staples & cloth,
	he should not make a hoard.
Nor should he be upset
when receiving no gains.
Absorbed, not 	foot-loose,
he should refrain	from restlessness,
shouldn't be		heedless,
should live 		in a noise-less abode.
Not making much of sleep,
ardent, given to wakefulness,
he should abandon sloth, deception,
	laughter, sports,
	fornication, & all that goes with it;
should not practice charms,
	interpret physical marks, dreams,
	the stars, animal cries;
should not be devoted to
	practicing medicine or inducing fertility.

A monk shouldn't tremble at blame
or grow haughty with praise;
should thrust aside selfishness, greed,
divisive speech, anger;
shouldn't buy or sell
or revile anyone anywhere;
shouldn't linger in villages,
or flatter people in hopes of gains.

A monk shouldn't boast
or speak with ulterior motive,
shouldn't train in insolence
or speak quarrelsome words;
shouldn't engage in deception
or knowingly cheat;
shouldn't despise others for their
	life,
	discernment,
	precepts,
	or practices.
Provoked with many words
from contemplatives
or ordinary people,
he shouldn't respond harshly,
for those who retaliate
	aren't calm.

Knowing this teaching,
a monk inquiring
should always
train in it mindfully.
Knowing Unbinding as peace,
he shouldn't be heedless
of Gotama's message —
for he, the Conqueror unconquered,
witnessed the Dhamma,
	not by hearsay,
	but directly, himself.
So, heedful, you
should always train
in line with that Blessed One's message,"
the Blessed One said.



Attadanda Sutta: The Rod Embraced

"When embraced,
the rod of violence[1] 
	breeds danger & fear:
Look at people quarreling.
	I will tell of how
	I experienced
		dismay.
Seeing people floundering
like fish in small puddles,
competing with one another —
	as I saw this,
	fear came into me.
The world was entirely
	without substance.
All the directions
			were knocked out of line.
Wanting a haven for myself,
I saw nothing that wasn't laid claim to.
Seeing nothing in the end
but competition,
I felt discontent.
And then I saw
an arrow here,
	so very hard to see,
	embedded in the heart.
Overcome by this arrow
you run in all directions.
But simply on pulling it out
	you don't run,
	you don't sink.[2] 

[Here the trainings are recited.] [3] 

Whatever things are tied down in the world,
you shouldn't be set on them.
Having totally penetrated
sensual pleasures,
sensual passions,[4] 
you should train for your own
		Unbinding.
Be truthful, not insolent,
not deceptive, rid
of divisiveness.
Without anger, the sage
should cross over the evil
	of greed & avarice.
He should conquer laziness,
			weariness,
			sloth;
shouldn't consort with heedlessness,
shouldn't stand firm in his pride —
	the man with his heart set
		on Unbinding.
He shouldn't engage in lying,
shouldn't create a sense of allure in form,
should fully fathom conceit,
and live refraining from impulsiveness;
shouldn't 	delight in what's old,
		prefer what's new,[5] 
		grieve over decline,
		get entangled in
			what's dazzling & bright.[6] 

I call greed
	a 'great flood';
hunger, a swift current.
Preoccupations are ripples;
sensuality, a bog
	hard to cross over.
Not deviating from truth,
a sage stands on high ground
		: a brahman.

Having renounced All,[7] 
he is said to be at peace;
having clearly known, he
is an attainer-of-wisdom;
knowing the Dhamma, he's
	independent.
Moving rightly through the world,
	he doesn't envy
	anyone here.

Whoever here has gone over & beyond
sensual passions —
an attachment hard
to transcend in the world,
doesn't sorrow,
doesn't fret.
He, his stream cut, is free
	from bonds.

Burn up what's before,
and have nothing for after.
If you don't grasp
at what's in between,[8]
	you will go about, calm.

For whom, in name & form,
		in every way,
there's no sense of mine,
and who doesn't grieve
over what is not:
	he, in the world,
	isn't defeated,
	suffers no loss.[9] 

To whom there doesn't occur
	'This is mine,'
for whom 'nothing is others,'
feeling no sense of mine-ness,
doesn't grieve at the thought
	'I have nothing.'

Not harsh,
not greedy, not
	perturbed,
	everywhere
in tune:
	this is the reward
	— I say when asked —
	for those who are free
	from pre-
	conceptions.

For one unperturbed
 — who knows —
there's no accumulating.
Abstaining, unaroused,
he everywhere sees
	security.[10] 
	The sage
doesn't speak of himself
as among those who are higher,
	equal,
or lower.
At peace, free of selfishness,
he doesn't embrace, doesn't
		reject,"
the Blessed One said.



Sariputta Sutta: To Sariputta

"Never before
have I seen or heard
from anyone
of a teacher with such lovely speech
come, together with his following
from Tusita heaven,[1] 
as the One with Eyes
who appears to the world with its devas
having dispelled all darkness
having arrived at delight
		all alone.

To that One Awakened —
	unentangled, Such, un-
	deceptive,
	come with his following —
I have come with a question
on behalf of the many
here who are fettered.
For a monk disaffected,
frequenting a place that's remote —
	the root of a tree,
	a cemetery,
	in mountain caves
	various places to stay —
how many are the fears there
at which he shouldn't tremble
	— there in his noiseless abode —
how many the dangers in the world
for the monk 	going the direction
			he never has gone
that he should transcend
there in his isolated abode?
What should be
	the ways of his speech?
What should be
	his range there of action?
What should be
	a resolute monk's
	precepts & practices?[2] 
Undertaking what training
	— alone, astute, & mindful —
would he blow away
his own impurities
as a silver smith,
	those in molten silver?"

The Buddha:
"I will tell you
as one who knows,
what is comfort
for one disaffected
resorting to a remote place,
desiring self-awakening
in line with the Dhamma.
An enlightened monk,
	living circumscribed,
	mindful,
shouldn't fear the five fears:
of horseflies, mosquitoes, snakes,
human contact, four-footed beings;
shouldn't be disturbed
by those following another's teaching
even on seeing their manifold
		terrors;
should overcome still other
further dangers
as he seeks what is skillful.

	Touched
	by the touch
of discomforts, hunger,
he should endure cold
& inordinate heat.
He with no home,
in many ways touched by these things,
striving, should make firm his persistence.

He shouldn't commit a theft,
shouldn't speak a lie,
should touch with thoughts of good will
beings firm & infirm.
Conscious of when
his mind is stirred up & turbid,
he should dispel it:
	'It's on the Dark One's side.'

He shouldn't come under the sway
of anger or pride.
Having dug up their root
he would stand firm.
Then, when prevailing
	— yes —
he'd prevail over his sense of dear & undear.
Yearning 	for discernment
enraptured 	with what's admirable,
he should overcome these dangers,
should conquer 	discontent
			in his isolated spot,
should conquer 	these four
			thoughts of lament:

	'What will I eat,
	or where will I eat.
	How badly I slept.
	Tonight where will I sleep?'

These lamenting thoughts
he should subdue —
one under training,
wandering without home.
Receiving food & cloth
at appropriate times,
he should have a sense of enough
for the sake of contentment.[3] 
Guarded in regard to these things
going restrained into a village,
even when harassed
he shouldn't say a harsh word.

With eyes downcast,
& not footloose,
committed to jhana,
he should be continually wakeful.[4] 
Strengthening equanimity,
	centered within,
he should cut off any penchant
to conjecture or worry.
When reprimanded,
he should — mindful —
		rejoice;[5] 
should smash any stubbornness
toward his fellows in the holy life;
should utter skillful words
that are not untimely;
should give no mind
to the gossip people might say.

And then there are in the world
the five kinds of dust
for whose dispelling, mindful
he should train:
with regard to forms, sounds, tastes,
smells, & tactile sensations
	he should conquer passion;
with regard to these things
	he should subdue his desire.

A monk, mindful,
his mind well-released,
contemplating the right Dhamma
at the right times,
	on coming
	to oneness
	should annihilate
	darkness,"
the Blessed One said.



5. Parayanavagga — The Chapter on the Way to the Far Shore
__________________________________________________________

Ajita-manava-puccha: Ajita's Questions

[Ajita:]
	With what
is the world shrouded?
	Because of what
doesn't it shine?
	With what
is it smeared? Tell me.
	What
is its great danger & fear?

[The Buddha:]
	With ignorance
the world is shrouded.
	Because of stinginess,
heedlessness,
it doesn't shine.
	With longing
it's smeared — I tell you.
Suffering-stress:
its great danger & fear.

[Ajita:]
They flow every which way,
	the streams.
What is their blocking,
what their restraint — tell me —
with what are they finally stopped?

[The Buddha:]
Whatever streams
there are in the world:
	their blocking is
	mindfulness, mindfulness
	is their restraint — I tell you —
with discernment
	they're finally stopped.

[Ajita:]
Discernment & mindfulness,
name & form, dear sir:
Tell me, when asked this,
	where are they brought to a halt?

[The Buddha:]
This question you've asked, Ajita,
I'll answer it for you —
where name & form
	are brought to a halt
	without trace:
With the cessation of consciousness
	they're brought
	to a halt.

[Ajita:]
Those here who have fathomed the Dhamma,
	those who are learners,
	those who are run-of-the-mill:
When you, dear sir, astute,
	are asked this,
tell me their manner of life.

[The Buddha:]
He should not hanker
		for sensual pleasures,
	should be limpid in mind.
Skilled in all mental qualities,
he, the monk, should live his life
		mindfully.



Tissa-metteyya-manava-puccha: Tissa-metteyya's Questions

[Tissa-metteyya:]
	Who
here in the world
is contented?
	Who
has no agitations?
	What thinker
knowing both sides,
doesn't adhere in between?
	Whom
do you call a great person?
	Who here
has gone past
the seamstress:
			craving.

[The Buddha:]
	He who
in the midst of sensualities,
follows the holy life,
always mindful, craving-free;
	the monk who is
— through fathoming things —
		Unbound:
he has no agitations. He,
the thinker
knowing both sides,
doesn't adhere in between. He
I call a great person. He
here has gone past
the seamstress:
			craving.



Punnaka-manava-puccha: Punnaka's Questions

[Punnaka:]
To the one unperturbed,
who has seen the root [of all things],
I have come with a question.
Because of what
have many human seers
	— noble warriors, brahmans —
offered sacrifices to devas
here in the world?
I ask you, O Blessed One.
Please tell me.

[The Buddha:]
Those many human seers
	— noble warriors, brahmans —
who have offered sacrifices to devas
here in the world, Punnaka,
hoping for more of this state of being,
	offered their sacrifices
	because of aging.

[Punnaka:]
Those many human seers
	— noble warriors, brahmans —
who have offered sacrifices to devas
here in the world:
Have they, O Blessed One,
heeding the path of sacrifice,
crossed over birth & aging?
I ask you, O Blessed One.
Please tell me.

[The Buddha:]
They hoped for, liked,
	longed for,
	so sacrificed —
they longed for sensuality,
	dependent on gain.
I tell you:
	those who take on the yoke
		of sacrifice,
	impassioned with
	the passion for becoming,
have not crossed over birth & aging.

[Punnaka:]
If those who take on the yoke of sacrifice
haven't crossed over the flood, dear sir,
then who in the world
of beings divine & human
has crossed over birth & aging?
	I ask you, O Blessed One.
	Please tell me.

[The Buddha:]
He who has fathomed
the far & near in the world,
for whom there is nothing
perturbing in the world —
	his vices evaporated,
	undesiring, untroubled,
		at peace —
he, I tell you, has crossed over birth
			& aging.



Mettagu-manava-puccha: Mettagu's Questions

[Mettagu:]
I ask you, O Blessed One.
Please tell me.
I regard you as knowledgeable,
with your self developed.
From what have the many
forms of stress & suffering
arisen in the world?

[The Buddha:]
	If you ask me
the coming-into-being
of stress & suffering,
I will tell it to you
	as one who discerns.
From acquisition [1] as cause
the many forms of stress & suffering
come into being in the world.
Whoever, unknowing, makes acquisitions
	— the fool —
comes to stress & suffering
	again
	& again.

So one who's discerning,
	focused on the birth
	of stress & suffering,
	their coming-into-being,
should make no acquisitions.

[Mettagu:]
What we asked, you've expounded.
Now we ask something else.
	Please tell us.
How do the prudent
cross over the flood of
	birth & aging,
	lamentation & sorrow?
Please, sage, declare this to me
	as this Dhamma has
	been known by you.

[The Buddha:]
I will teach you the Dhamma
	— in the here & now,
	not quoted words —
knowing which, living mindfully,
you'll cross over beyond
entanglement in the world.

[Mettagu:]
And I relish, Great Seer,
that Dhamma 	supreme,
knowing which, living mindfully,
I'll cross over beyond
entanglement in the world.

[The Buddha:]
Whatever you're alert to,
	above, below,
	across, in between:[2] 
dispelling any delight,
		any laying claim
		to those things,
consciousness should not take a stance
		in becoming.
The monk who dwells thus
	— mindful, heedful —
letting go of his sense of mine,
knowing right here would abandon
		birth & aging,
	lamentation & sorrow,
		stress & suffering.

[Mettagu:]
I relish, Gotama, the Great Seer's words
well-expounded, without acquisition,
for yes, O Blessed One,
you've abandoned stress & suffering
as this Dhamma has
been known by you.
And they, too, would abandon stress & suffering
	those whom you, sage,
	would admonish unceasingly.
Having met you, I bow down to you,
		Great One.
Perhaps you will admonish me
		unceasingly.

[The Buddha:]
Whoever you recognize
as a knowledgeable brahman,
	possessing nothing,
	unentangled
	in sensuality & becoming
yes, he has crossed over the flood.
Having crossed to the far shore,
	he is without
	harshness or doubt.

And any one who has realized,
who is knowledgeable here,
	having unentangled the bond
	to becoming and non-, [3] 
free of craving,
	untroubled,
	undesiring — he,
I tell you, has crossed over birth
			& aging.



Dhotaka-manava-puccha: Dhotaka's Questions

[Dhotaka:]
I ask you, O Blessed One.
Please tell me.
I hope for your words, Great Seer.
Having heard your pronouncement,
I'll train for my own
	Unbinding.

[The Buddha:]
In that case,
be ardent —
astute & mindful right here.
Then, having heard my pronouncement,
train for your own
	Unbinding.

[Dhotaka:]
I see in the world of beings
	divine & human,
a brahman who lives
possessing		nothing.
	I pay homage to him
	the All-around Eye.
From my doubts, O Sakyan, release me!

[The Buddha:]
No one in the world, Dhotaka,
can I release from doubting.
But knowing the most excellent Dhamma,
you will cross over the flood.

[Dhotaka:]
Teach with compassion, O brahman,
the Dhamma of seclusion
so that I may know —
so that I, unafflicted as space,
may live right here,
	independent,
	at peace.

[The Buddha:]
I will teach you peace
	— in the here & now,
	not quoted words —
knowing which, living mindfully,
you'll go beyond
entanglement in the world.

[Dhotaka:]
And I relish, Great Seer,
that peace 		supreme,
knowing which, living mindfully,
I'll go beyond
entanglement in the world.

[The Buddha:]
Whatever you're alert to,
	above, below,
	across, in between:
knowing it as a bond in the world,
	don't create craving
	for becoming or non-.



Upasiva-manava-puccha: Upasiva's Questions

[Upasiva:]
Alone, Sakyan, & with nothing to rely on,
I can't venture across
the great flood.
Tell me, All-around Eye,
the support to rely on
for crossing over this flood.

[The Buddha:]
Mindfully focused on nothingness, [1] 
relying on 'There isn't,'
you should cross over the flood.
Abandoning sensual pleasures,
abstaining from conversations,
keep watch for the ending of
craving, night & day.

[Upasiva:]
One free from passion
for all sensual pleasures
relying on nothingness, letting go of all else,
released in the highest emancipation of perception:
	Does he stay there unaffected?

[The Buddha:]
One free from passion
for all sensual pleasures
relying on nothingness, letting go of all else,
released in the highest emancipation of perception:
	He stays there unaffected.

[Upasiva:]
If he stays there, O All-around Eye,
unaffected for many years,
	right there
would he be cooled & released?
Would his consciousness be like that?

[The Buddha:]
As a flame overthrown by the force of the wind
	goes to an end
	that cannot be classified,[2] 
so the sage free from naming activity
	goes to an end
	that cannot be classified.

[Upasiva:]
He who has reached the end:
	Does he not exist,
	or is he for eternity
	free from dis-ease?
Please, sage, declare this to me
	as this phenomenon has been known by you.

[The Buddha:]
One who has reached the end
	has no criterion [3] 
by which anyone would say that —
	for him it doesn't exist.
When all phenomena are done away with,[4] 
	all means of speaking
	are done away with as well.



Nanda-manava-puccha: Nanda's Questions

[Nanda:]
There are in the world
sages, they say
	— in what way?
Do they call one a sage
for possessing knowledge
or possessing a way of life?

[The Buddha:]
Not on account of his views,
	learning,
	or knowledge
do the skilled here, Nanda,
		call one a sage.
Those who live
	disarmed,
	undesiring,
	untroubled:
		those, I say, are called sages.

[Nanda:]
Whatever brahmans & contemplatives
	describe purity
		in terms of views & learning,
	describe purity
		in terms of precepts & practices,
	describe purity
		in terms of manifold ways:
have they, dear sir, living there in that way,
crossed over birth & aging?
	I ask you, O Blessed One.
	Please tell me.

[The Buddha:]
Whatever brahmans & contemplatives
	describe purity
		in terms of views & learning,
	describe purity
		in terms of precepts & practices,
	describe purity
		in terms of manifold ways:
none of them, living there in that way,
I tell you, have crossed over birth & aging.

[Nanda:]
Whatever brahmans & contemplatives
	describe purity
		in terms of views & learning,
	describe purity
		in terms of precepts & practices,
	describe purity
		in terms of manifold ways:
if, sage, as you say,
they've not crossed over the flood,
then who in the world
of beings divine & human
has crossed over birth & aging?
	I ask you, O Blessed One.
	Please tell me.

[The Buddha:]
I don't say that all brahmans & contemplatives
are shrouded in birth & aging.
Those here who've abandoned
	what's seen, heard, & sensed,
	precepts & practices [1] 
		— all —
who've abandoned their manifold ways
		— again, all —
who, comprehending craving,
	are effluent-free:
they are the ones, I tell you,
who've crossed over the flood.

[Nanda:]
I relish, Gotama, the Great Seer's words
well-expounded, without acquisition.
Those here who've abandoned
	what's seen, heard, & sensed,
	precepts & practices
		— all —
who've abandoned their manifold ways
		— again, all —
who, comprehending craving,
	are effluent-free:
I, too, say they've crossed over the flood.



Hemaka-manava-puccha: Hemaka's Question

[Hemaka:]
In the past,
before hearing Gotama's teaching,
when anyone explained 'It was,' 'It will be,'
all that was hearsay,
		quoted words.
All that promoted conjecture
and gave me no pleasure.
Now, sage, teach me the Dhamma
demolishing craving,
knowing which, living mindfully,
one would cross over beyond
entanglement in the world.

[The Buddha:]
Here, Hemaka,
with regard to things that are dear
	— seen, heard, sensed, & cognized —
there is:	the dispelling of passion & desire,
		the undying state of Unbinding.
Those knowing this, mindful,
	fully unbound
	in the here & now,
are forever calmed,
have crossed over beyond
entanglement in the world.



Todeyya-manava-puccha: Todeyya's Questions

[Todeyya:]
One in whom
there dwell no sensualities;
one in whom
no craving is found;
one who has crossed over perplexity —
	his emancipation:
	what is it like?

[The Buddha:]
One in whom
there dwell no sensualities;
one in whom
no craving is found;
one who has crossed over perplexity —
	his emancipation
	is not other than that.

[Todeyya:]
Is he without desire,
or desiring?
Discerning or
still acquiring discernment?
Describe the sage to me, Sakyan
with the all-around eye,
so that I may recognize
what he is like.

[The Buddha:]
He's without desire,
	not desiring;
discerning,
not still acquiring discernment.
Recognize the sage, Todeyya,
as having	nothing,
unentangled
	in sensuality
		& becoming.



Kappa-manava-puccha: Kappa's Question

[Kappa:]
For one stranded in the middle of the lake,
in the flood of great danger — birth —
overwhelmed with aging & death:
	Tell me the island, dear sir,
	and show me the island
	so that this may not happen again.

[The Buddha:]
For one stranded in the middle of the lake,
in the flood of great danger — birth —
overwhelmed with aging & death,
	I will tell you the island, Kappa.

Having nothing,
clinging to no thing:
	That is the island,
	there is no other.
That's Unbinding, I tell you,
the total ending of aging & death.

Those knowing this, mindful,
		fully unbound
		in the here & now,
	don't serve as Mara's servants,
	don't come under Mara's sway.



Jatukanni-manava-puccha: Jatukannin's Question

[Jatukannin:]
Hearing that there was a hero —
	desiring no sensuality,
	having crossed over the flood —
I've come with a question:
	Tell me the state of peace,
	O One with quick eyes. O Blessed One,
		tell me
		as it actually is.
For the Blessed One lives
	having surpassed sensuality,
	as the radiant sun, in its radiance,
		the earth.
Limited my discernment,
	O One whose discernment's profound.
Teach me to know the Dhamma,
	the abandoning here
		of birth
		& aging.

[The Buddha:]
Subdue greed for sensual pleasures,
	& see renunciation as rest.
Let there be nothing grasped
	or rejected by you.
Burn up what's before,
and have nothing for after.
If you don't grasp
at what's in between, [1] 
	you will go about, calm.
One completely devoid of greed
for name & form, brahman,
has
no effluents
	by which he would go
	under Mara's sway.



Bhadravudha-manava-puccha: Bhadravudha's Questions

[Bhadravudha:]
I entreat the one
who is very intelligent,
	released, unperturbed —
who has 	abandoned home,
		abandoned delight,
		abandoned resemblances,
		cut through craving,
		crossed over the flood.

Having heard the Great One, they will leave —
	the many gathered
	from many lands, hero,
	in hope of your words.
So tell them, please,
	how this Dhamma has
	been known to you.

[The Buddha:]
Subdue craving & clinging — all —
	above, below,
	across, in between. [1] 
For whatever people cling to in the world,
	it's through that
	that Mara pursues them.

So a monk, mindful,
	seeing these people
	clinging to entanglement
	as entangled in Death's realm,
should cling to nothing
	in all the world,
		every world.



Udaya-manava-puccha: Udaya's Questions

[Udaya:]
To the one in jhana
	seated dustless,
		passionless,
	his task done,
	effluent-free,
		gone to the beyond
		of all phenomena,
I've come with a question.
Tell me the gnosis of emancipation,
	the breaking open
	of ignorance.

[The Buddha:]
The abandoning
	both of sensual desires,
	& of unhappiness,
the dispelling of sloth,
the warding off of anxieties,
equanimity-&-mindfulness purified,
	with inspection of mental qualities
	swift in the forefront:
That I call the gnosis of emancipation, [1] 
	the breaking open
	of ignorance. [2] 

[Udaya:]
With what
	is the world fettered?
With what
	is it examined?
Through the abandoning of what
	is there said to be
		Unbinding?

[The Buddha:]
With delight
	the world's fettered.
With directed thought
	it's examined.
Through the abandoning of craving
	is there said to be
		Unbinding.

[Udaya:]
Living mindful in what way
does one bring consciousness
		to a halt?
We've come questioning
	to the Blessed One.
Let us hear your words.

[The Buddha:]
Not relishing feeling,
	inside or out:
One living mindful in this way
	brings consciousness
		to a halt.



Posala-manava-puccha: Posala's Questions

[Posala:]
To one who reveals the past
	— unperturbed,
		his doubts cut through —
	who has gone to the beyond
	of all phenomena,
I've come with a question.
I ask the Sakyan about the knowledge [1] 
of one devoid of perception of forms,
who has abandoned all the body,
			every body,
who sees, within & without,
	'There is nothing':
How is he
	to be led further on?

[The Buddha:]
The Tathagata, knowing directly
	all stations of consciousness, [2] 
knows for one stationed in them
	release
	& the steps leading there.

Knowing directly
the origin of nothingness
to be the fetter of delight,
one then sees there clearly.
That's his genuine knowledge —
	the brahman who has lived
	to fulfillment.



Mogharaja-manava-puccha: Mogharaja's Question

[Mogharaja:]
Twice now, O Sakyan,
	I've asked you,
but you, O One with Eyes,
	haven't answered me.
"When asked the third time,
the divine seer answers":
	so I have heard.
This world, the next world,
the Brahma world with its devas:
	I don't know how they're viewed
	by the glorious Gotama.
So to the one who has seen
to the far extreme,
I've come with a question:
	One who regards the world in what way
	isn't seen by Death's King?

[The Buddha:]
Always mindful, Mogharaja,
regard the world as
	empty,
having removed any view
	in terms of self.
This way
one is above and beyond death.
	One who regards the world
	in this way
	isn't seen by Death's King.



Pingiya-manava-puccha: Pingiya's Question

[Pingiya:]
I'm old & weak,
my complexion dull.
I've blurry eyes
and trouble hearing,
but may I not perish deluded,
			confused!
Teach me the Dhamma
so that I may know
the abandoning here
	of birth & aging.

[The Buddha:]
Seeing people suffering
on account of their bodies —
	heedless people are oppressed
	on account of their bodies —
then heedful, Pingiya,
let go of the body
	for the sake of no further becoming.

[Pingiya:]
In the four cardinal directions,
the four intermediate,
above & below
	— the ten directions —
there is nothing in the world
	unseen, unheard,
	unsensed, uncognized by you.
Teach me the Dhamma
so that I may know
the abandoning here
	of birth & aging.

[The Buddha:]
Seeing people,
	victims of craving —
	aflame, overwhelmed with aging —
then heedful, Pingiya,
let go of craving
	for the sake of no further becoming.