/*title*/Sakka Samyutta (Sakka (the Deva king))
11.3 Dhajagga Sutta: The Top of the Standard
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Piyadassi

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying at Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery. There he addressed the monks, "Monks!"

"Yes, lord," the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said, "Monks, once the devas & asuras were arrayed for battle. Then Sakka, the chief of the devas, addressed the devas of the Thirty-three: 'If, dear sirs, when the devas have gone into battle, there should arise fear, terror, or horripilation, then on that occasion you should catch sight of the top of my standard. For when you have caught sight of the top of my standard, whatever fear, terror, or horripilation there is will be abandoned.

"'If you can't catch sight of the top of my standard, then you should catch sight of the top of the deva-king Pajapati's standard. For when you have caught sight of the top of the deva-king Pajapati's standard, whatever fear, terror, or horripilation there is will be abandoned.

"'If you can't catch sight of the top of the deva-king Pajapati's standard, then you should catch sight of the top of the deva-king Varuna's standard. For when For when you have caught sight of the top of the deva-king Varuna's standard, whatever fear, terror, or horripilation there is will be abandoned.

"'If you can't catch sight of the top of the deva-king Varuna's standard, then you should catch sight of the top of the deva-king Isana's standard. For when you have caught sight of the top of the deva-king Isana's standard, whatever fear, terror, or horripilation there is will be abandoned.'

"But, monks, when the top of the deva-chief Sakka's standard is caught sight of, or when the top of the deva-king Pajapati's standard is caught sight of, or when the top of the deva-king Varuna's standard is caught sight of, or when the top of the deva-king Isana's standard is caught sight of, whatever fear, terror, or horripilation there is may be abandoned or may not be abandoned. Why is that? Because Sakka the chief of the devas is not devoid of passion, not devoid of aversion, not devoid of delusion. He feels fear, feels terror, feels dread. He runs away.

"But I tell you this: If — when you have gone into the wilderness, to the shade of a tree, or to an empty building — there should arise fear, terror, or horripilation, then on that occasion you should recollect me: 'Indeed, the Blessed One is worthy & rightly self-awakened, consummate in knowledge & conduct, well-gone, an expert with regard to the world, unexcelled as a trainer for those people fit to be tamed, the Teacher of divine & human beings, awakened, blessed.' For when you have recollected me, whatever fear, terror, or horripilation there is will be abandoned.

"If you can't recollect me, then you should recollect the Dhamma: 'The Dhamma is well-expounded by the Blessed One, to be seen here & now, timeless, inviting verification, pertinent, to be realized by the wise for themselves.' For when you have recollected the Dhamma, whatever fear, terror, or horripilation there is will be abandoned.

"If you can't recollect the Dhamma, then you should recollect the Sangha: 'The Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples who have practiced well... who have practiced straight-forwardly... who have practiced methodically... who have practiced masterfully — in other words, the four types of noble disciples when taken as pairs, the eight when taken as individual types [1] — they are the Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples: worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of respect, the unexcelled field of merit for the world.' For when you have recollected the Sangha, whatever fear, terror, or horripilation where is will be abandoned. Why is that? Because the Tathagata — worthy & rightly self-awakened — is devoid of passion, devoid of aversion, devoid of delusion. He feels no fear, feels no terror, feels no dread. He doesn't run away."

That is what the Blessed One said. Having said that, the One-well-gone, the Teacher, further said this:

In the wilderness,
in the shade of a tree,
in an empty building, monks,
recollect the Buddha.
	 Your fear won't exist.

If you can't recall the Buddha
	  — best in the world,
	 the bull of men —
then you should recall the Dhamma:
	 leading outward, well-taught.

If you can't recall the Dhamma
	  — leading outward,
	 well-taught —
then you should recall the Sangha:
	 the field of merit unexcelled.

When thus recalling
the Buddha, Dhamma, & Sangha, monks,
there'll be no horripilation,
terror,
or fear.

Notes
1.
The four pairs are (1) the person on the path to stream-entry, the person experiencing the fruit of stream-entry; (2) the person on the path to once-returning, the person experiencing the fruit of once-returning; (3) the person on the path to non-returning, the person experiencing the fruit of non-returning; (4) the person on the path to arahantship, the person experiencing the fruit of arahantship. The eight individuals are the eight types forming these four pairs.


11.4 Vepacitti Sutta: Calm in the Face of Anger
translated from the Pali by
Andrew Olendzki
© 2005

Translator's Introduction

This noble teaching on how to respond when faced with anger is placed in a mythical setting. The story is told by the Buddha of a great war between devas (gods) and asuras (demons) that took place in ancient times. The devas are ultimately victorious (as they are in the Greek and Norse versions of the same myth) and capture Vepacitti, the ruler of the asuras. Bound in chains, he is brought to Tavatimsa and into the presence of Sakka, ruler of the gods.

Being the demon that he his, Vepacitti hurls a torrent of abuse at his captor, calling him all sorts of insulting names (the catalog of which in the commentary is most interesting). Sakka, however, is unmoved, inspiring Matali, his charioteer, to begin the following poetic exchange:

The poem is in the prevalent vatta meter, with eight syllables per line, and contains much subtle word-play. For example, the words bala (fool) and bala (strong) dance with one another throughout the piece (appearing fully 17 times), nowhere more intimately than in the frolicking alliteration of lines 31 and 32 (abalan-tam balam aahu yassa balaabalam balam). The linking of the word titikkhati (forbearance) with the similarly sounding tikicchati (healing) is also a poignant touch that is hardly accidental.

This exchange shows well how the Buddha adapted the heroic ideals of his warrior's heritage to the inner struggle for self-mastery. The strength of the victorious Sakka lies in his wisdom and forbearance. The weakness of the vanquished asura comes from his lack of understanding (hence the label 'fool'), which renders him helpless to resist the passions raging within.

Though these verses were penned 2,500 years ago, the truth behind them is timeless. It is the same that has helped many non-violent social and political reform movements achieve dramatic results in our own century. Conquest is only the apparent victory of the short-sighted, while transformation of oneself and others is the more lasting victory of the wise. Remaining unprovoked in the face of anger and hostility still offers the best hope for healing our troubled world.

[Matali:]
Could it be you're afraid, Sakka,
Or weak, that you forbear like this,
Though hearing such insulting words
From the mouth of Vepacitti?

[Sakka:]
I am neither afraid nor weak,
Yet I forbear Vepacitti.
How is it one who knows, like me,
Would get provoked by such a fool?

[Matali:]
More angry will a fool become
If no one puts a stop to him.
So let the wise restrain the fool
By the use of a mighty stick.

[Sakka:]
This is the only thing, I deem,
That will put a stop to the fool:
Knowing well the other's anger, 
One is mindful and remains calm.

[Matali:]
This very forbearance of yours,
Sakka, I see as a mistake.
For when a fool reckons like this:
"From fear of me he does forbear,"
The dolt will come on stronger still
— Like a bull the more that one flees.

[Sakka:]
Let him think whatever he likes:
"From fear of me he does forbear."
Among ideals and highest goods
None better than patience is found.

For surely he who, being strong,
Forbears the ones who are more weak
— Forever enduring the weak —
That is called the highest patience.

For whom strength is the strength of fools,
It is said of the strong "He's weak!"
For the strong, guarding the dhamma,
Contentiousness is never found.

It is indeed a fault for one
Who returns anger for anger.
Not giving anger for anger,
One wins a double victory.

He behaves for the good of both:
Himself and the other person.
Knowing well the other's anger,
He is mindful and remains calm.

In this way he is healing both:
Himself and the other person.
The people who think "He's a fool,"
Just don't understand the dhamma.


11.5 Subhasita-jaya Sutta: Victory Through What is Well Spoken
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi at Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery. There he addressed the monks, "Monks!"

"Yes, lord," the monks responded.

The Blessed One said, "Once in the past the devas & asuras[1] were arrayed for battle. Then Vepacitti the asura-king said to Sakka the deva-king: 'Let there be victory through what is well spoken.'

"'Yes, Vepacitti, let there be victory through what is well spoken.'

"So the devas & asuras appointed a panel of judges, [thinking,] 'These will decide for us what is well spoken & poorly spoken.'

"Then Vepacitti the asura-king said to Sakka the deva-king, 'Say a verse, deva-king!'

"When this was said, Sakka the deva-king said to Vepacitti the asura-king, 'But you are the senior deity here, Vepacitti. You say a verse.'

"When this was said, Vepacitti recited this verse:

'Fools would flare up even more
if there were no constraints.
Thus an enlightened one
should restrain the fool
with a heavy stick.'
"When Vepacitti had said this verse, the asuras applauded but the devas were silent. So Vepacitti said to Sakka, 'Say a verse, deva-king!'

"When this was said, Sakka recited this verse:

	'This, I think,
is the only constraint for a fool:
When, knowing the other's provoked,
	you mindfully grow calm.'
"When Sakka had said this verse, the devas applauded but the asuras were silent. So Sakka said to Vepacitti, 'Say a verse, Vepacitti!'

"When this was said, Vepacitti recited this verse:

'Vasava,[2] I see a fault
in this very forbearance:
When the fool thinks,
	"He's forbearing
	out of fear of me,"
the idiot pursues you even more —
as a cow, someone who runs away.'
"When Vepacitti had said this verse, the asuras applauded but the devas were silent. So Vepacitti said to Sakka, 'Say a verse, deva-king!'

"When this was said, Sakka recited this verse:

'It doesn't matter
whether he thinks,
	"He's forbearing
	out of fear of me."
One's own true good
is the foremost good.
	Nothing better
	than patience
	is found.

Whoever, when strong,
	is forbearing
to one who is weak:
that's the foremost patience.
The weak must constantly endure.

They call that strength
no strength at all:
	whoever's strength
	is the strength of a fool.
There's no reproach
for one who is strong,
guarding — guarded by — Dhamma.

You make things worse
when you flare up
at someone who's angry.
Whoever doesn't flare up
at someone who's angry
	wins a battle
	hard to win.

You live for the good of both
	— your own, the other's —
when, knowing the other's provoked,
	you mindfully grow calm.
When you work the cure of both
	— your own, the other's —
those who think you a fool
know nothing of Dhamma.'
"When Sakka had said this verse, the devas applauded but the asuras were silent. Then the deva & asura panel of judges said, 'The verses said by Vepacitti the asura-king lie in the sphere of swords & weapons — thence arguments, quarrels, & strife. Whereas the verses said by Sakka the deva-king lies outside the sphere of swords & weapons — thence no arguments, no quarrels, no strife. The victory through what is well spoken goes to Sakka the deva-king.'

"And that, monks, is how the victory through what was well spoken went to Sakka the deva-king."

Notes
1.
The devas & asuras were two groups of deities who fought for control of heaven (like the gods & titans in Greek mythology). The devas eventually won. The asuras, known for their fierce anger, later became classed as angry demons and, in some Buddhist cosmologies, are regarded as a class of being lower than human.
2.
Vasava — "Powerful" — is one of Sakka's epithets.