/*title*/Bhikkhuni Samyutta (Nuns)
5.1 Alavika Sutta: Sister Alavika
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Alavika the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from seclusion, approached her & addressed her in verse:

There's no
	escape
	in the world,
so what are you trying to do
	with solitude?
Enjoy sensual delights.
Don't be someone
	who later regrets.
Then the thought occurred to Alavika the nun: "Now who has recited this verse — a human being or a non-human one?" Then it occurred to her: "This is Mara the Evil One, who has recited this verse wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in me, wanting to make me fall away from seclusion."

Then, having understood that "This is Mara the Evil One," she replied to him in verses:

There is
	an escape in the world,
well touched by me
	with discernment —
something that you,
	you Evil One,
	kinsman of the heedless,
		don't know.
Sensual pleasures
	are like swords & spears;
the aggregates,
	their executioner's block.
What you call sensual delight
	is no delight for me.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Alavika the nun knows me" — vanished right there.


5.2 Soma Sutta: Sister Soma
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translations: Bodhi | Olendzki

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Soma the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from concentration, approached her & addressed her in verse:

	That
	which is
to be attained by seers
 — the place so very hard to reach —
	women
	can't
 — with their two-inch discernment —
	attain.
Then the thought occurred to Soma the nun: "Now who has recited this verse — a human being or a non-human one?" Then it occurred to her: "This is Mara the Evil One, who has recited this verse wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in me, wanting to make me fall away from concentration."

Then, having understood that "This is Mara the Evil One," she replied to him in verses:

	What
	difference
does being a woman make
when the mind's well-centered,
when knowledge is progressing,
seeing clearly, rightly,
	into the Dhamma.

Anyone who thinks
	'I'm a woman'
	or 'a man'
or 'Am I anything at all?' —
	that's who Mara's
	fit to address.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Soma the nun knows me" — vanished right there.


5.3 Gotami Sutta: Sister Gotami
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Kisa Gotami the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from concentration, approached her & addressed her in verse:

	Why,
with your sons killed,
do you sit all alone,
	your face in tears?
	All alone,
immersed in the midst of the forest,
	are you looking
	for a man?
Then the thought occurred to Kisa Gotami the nun: "Now who has recited this verse — a human being or a non-human one?" Then it occurred to her: "This is Mara the Evil One, who has recited this verse wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in me, wanting to make me fall away from concentration."

Then, having understood that "This is Mara the Evil One," she replied to him in verses:

I've gotten past
	the killing of sons,
have made that the end
to [my search for] men.
I don't grieve,
I don't weep —
	and I'm not afraid of you,
	my friend.
It's everywhere destroyed — delight.
The mass of darkness is shattered.
Having defeated the army of death,
		free
	of fermentations
		I dwell.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Kisa Gotami the nun knows me" — vanished right there.


5.4 Vijaya Sutta: Sister Vijaya
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Vijaya the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from concentration, approached her & addressed her in verse:

You, a beautiful young woman.
	I, a young man.
Come, my lady,
let's enjoy ourselves
	to the music of a five-piece band.
Then the thought occurred to Vijaya the nun: "Now who has recited this verse — a human being or a non-human one?" Then it occurred to her: "This is Mara the Evil One, who has recited this verse wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in me, wanting to make me fall away from concentration."

Then, having understood that "This is Mara the Evil One," she replied to him in verses:

Lovely sights, sounds,
smells, tastes,
& tactile sensations
	I leave to
	you, Mara.
		I
	have no need
	for them.
I'm disgusted, ashamed
of this putrid body —
disintegrating, dissolving.
	Sensual craving
	is rooted out.
Beings who have come to form,
& those with a share in the formless,
& the peaceful attainments:
	their darkness
	is completely destroyed.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Vijaya the nun knows me" — vanished right there.


5.5 Uppalavanna Sutta: Sister Uppalavanna
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Uppalavanna the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from concentration, approached her & addressed her in verse:

You've come, nun,
to this sal-tree
with its fine flowering crest,
and stand alone
at its root,
with no one
to match you in beauty.
In your foolishness,
aren't you afraid
of rape?
Then the thought occurred to Uppalavanna the nun: "Now who has recited this verse — a human being or a non-human one?" Then it occurred to her: "This is Mara the Evil One, who has recited this verse wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in me, wanting to make me fall away from concentration."

Then, having understood that "This is Mara the Evil One," she replied to him in verses:

If even a hundred-thousand rapists
came across me like this,
I wouldn't stir a hair.
I'd feel no terror,
	and I'm not afraid of you, Mara,
	even alone like this.

Here — I disappear.
I slip into your belly
or stand between your eyebrows,
	and you
	don't see me.
I have mastery
	over the mind,
have well-developed
	the bases of power.
I'm released from all bonds,
	and not afraid of you,
	my friend.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Uppalavanna the nun knows me" — vanished right there.


5.6 Cala Sutta: Sister Cala
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Cala the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from concentration, approached her & said, "What is it that you don't approve of, nun?"

"I don't approve of birth, my friend."

[Mara:]
Why don't you approve of birth?
	One who is born
	enjoys sensual pleasures.
Who on earth
ever persuaded you:
	'Nun, don't approve of birth'?

[Sister Cala:]
For one who is born
		there's death.
One who is born
		sees pain.
It's a binding, a flogging, a torment.
That's why one shouldn't approve
		of birth.

The Awakened One taught me the Dhamma
	— the overcoming of birth —
	for the abandoning of all pain,
		he established me in
		the truth.
But beings who have come to form
& those with a share in the formless,
	if they don't discern cessation,
	return to becoming-again.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Cala the nun knows me" — vanished right there.


5.7 Upacala Sutta: Sister Upacala
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Upacala the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from concentration, approached her & said, "Where do you want to reappear,[1] nun?"

"I don't want to reappear anywhere, my friend."

[Mara:]
The devas of the Thirty-three,
the Hours, the Contented,
those who delight in creation,
& those in control:
	direct your mind there
	and it will enjoy
		delight.

[Sister Upacala:]
The devas of the Thirty-three,
the Hours, the Contented,
those who delight in creation,
& those in control:
	they are bound
	with the bonds of sensuality;
	they come again
	under Mara's sway.
The whole world is 	burning.
The whole world is 	aflame.
The whole world is 	blazing.
The whole world is 	provoked.
The Unprovoked, Unblazing
— that people run-of-the-mill
	don't partake,
		where Mara's
		never been —
	that's where my heart
	truly delights.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Upacala the nun knows me" — vanished right there.

Notes
1.
To reappear = to be reborn.


5.8 Sisupacala Sutta: Sister Sisupacala
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Sisupacala the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall from solitude, approached her & said, "Whose philosophy do you approve of, nun?"

"I don't approve of anyone's philosophy, my friend."

[Mara:]
For whose sake
	have you shaved your head?
You look like a contemplative
but don't approve of a philosophy,
so why are you wandering here
	confused?

[Sister Sisupacala:]
Outside philosophers place
their confidence in views.
I don't approve
	of their teaching.
They're not adept
	in the Dhamma.
	But there is
the Awakened One,
born in the Sakyan clan,
a person without peer:
	all-conquering,
	Mara's subduer,
everywhere undefeated,
everywhere freed, independent;
		endowed with an Eye
	all-seeing, reaching the end of
	all kamma —
with the ending of acquisitions,
	released.
He, that Blessed One,
	is my teacher.
It's in his Dhamma
	that I delight.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Sisupacala the nun knows me" — vanished right there.



5.9 Sela Sutta: Sister Sela
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Sela the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from concentration, approached her & addressed her in verse:

By whom 	was this doll created?
Where 	is the doll's maker?
Where 	has the doll originated?
Where 	does it cease?
Then the thought occurred to Sela the nun: "Now who has recited this verse — a human being or a non-human one?" Then it occurred to her: "This is Mara the Evil One, who has recited this verse wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in me, wanting to make me fall away from concentration."

Then, having understood that "This is Mara the Evil One," she replied to him in verses:

This doll isn't self-made,
nor is this misery made by another.[1] 
In dependence on a cause
	it comes into play.
With the dissolution of the cause
	it ceases.
Just as a seed grows
	— when planted in a field —
because of the soil's savor
	together with moisture;
in the same way, these
	aggregates,
	properties,
	sense media
— in dependence on a cause —
	come into play.
With the dissolution of the cause
	they cease.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Sela the nun knows me" — vanished right there.

Note
1.
Alternative reading:

This doll, this misery,
	isn't created.


5.10 Vajira Sutta: Sister Vajira
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translation: Bodhi

Translator's note: This discourse dramatizes a problem that often arises in meditation practice — a speculative question arises that, if followed, pulls one out of concentration. Sister Vajira shows how to deal with the situation: recognize that the terms in which the question is expressed are just that — terms — and that whatever reality there is in the issue raised by the question can be reduced to phenomena observable in the immediate present. In ultimate terms, this comes down to the arising and passing away of stress, which should be observed and comprehended to the point where one can see through to that which neither arises nor passes away.

At Savatthi. Then, early in the morning, Vajira the nun put on her robes and, taking her bowl & outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms. When she had gone for alms in Savatthi and had returned from her alms round, after her meal she went to the Grove of the Blind to spend the day. Having gone deep into the Grove of the Blind, she sat down at the foot of a tree for the day's abiding.

Then Mara the Evil One, wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in her, wanting to make her fall away from concentration, approached her & addressed her in verse:

By whom 	was this living being created?
Where 	is the living being's maker?
Where 	has the living being originated?
Where 	does the living being
			cease?
Then the thought occurred to Vajira the nun: "Now who has recited this verse — a human being or a non-human one?" Then it occurred to her: "This is Mara the Evil One, who has recited this verse wanting to arouse fear, horripilation, & terror in me, wanting to make me fall away from concentration."

Then, having understood that "This is Mara the Evil One," she replied to him in verses:

What? Do you assume a 'living being,' Mara?
Do you take a position?
This is purely a pile of fabrications.
	Here no living being
	can be pinned down.

Just as when, with an assemblage of parts,
	there's the word,
chariot,
even so when aggregates are present,
	there's the convention of
living being.

For only stress 	is what comes to be;
stress, 	what remains & falls away.
Nothing but stress 	comes to be.
Nothing ceases	but stress.
Then Mara the Evil One — sad & dejected at realizing, "Vajira the nun knows me" — vanished right there.