/*title*/Brahmana Samyutta (Brahmans)
7.1 Dhanañjaanii Sutta: Dhanañjaani
translated from the Pali by
Maurice O'Connell Walshe
© 2007
The Pali title of this sutta is based on the PTS (Feer) edition.

Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was staying near Raajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove,[1] at the Squirrels' Feeding-Place. Now at that time the Brahman lady Dhanañjaani, wife of a certain Brahman of the Bhaaradvaaja family, was a fervent supporter of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha. And this lady, while serving the Bhaaradvaaja Brahman with his dinner, came before him and burst out with this triple inspired utterance: "Praise to the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Fully Self-Enlightened One! Praise to the Dhamma! Praise to the Sangha!"

At these words the Brahman said to her "Now then, now then! Every chance she gets this wretched woman has to sing the praises of that shaveling recluse! Now, woman, I'm going to tell that teacher of yours what I think of him!"

"Oh, Brahman, I know of nobody in this world with its gods, Maaras and Brahmaas, with its recluses and brahmans, whether they be divine or human, who could thus rebuke the Blessed One, the Arahant, the Fully Self-Enlightened One. But go on, Brahman, go and you will find out."

Then the Brahman, angry and displeased, went to see the Blessed One. After exchanging greetings and compliments with the Blessed One in a friendly and courteous manner, he sat down to one side. So seated, he addressed the Blessed One thus in verse:

What must we slay to live in happiness?
What must we slay if we would weep no more?
Is there any single thing of which,
You'd approve the killing, Gotama?

[The Blessed One replied:]
By slaying wrath you'll live in happiness
Slaying wrath, you'll no more need to weep.
Kill the poisoned root of anger, Brahman,
Which with sweetness leads to fevered rage.[2] 
Killing this the Noble Ones commend:
Slaying this, you'll no more need to weep.
At these words the Brahman said to the Blessed One: "Excellent, good Gotama,[3] most excellent! It is, good Gotama, as if someone were to set up something that had been knocked down, or to reveal what had been hidden, or to point out the right path to a man who had got lost, or to bring an oil lamp into a dark place so that those with eyes could see what was there — just so has the good Gotama shown me the truth[4] in various ways! I declare[5] that I go to the Lord Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of monks, I wish to embrace the homeless life[6] under the Lord Gotama, I wish to receive ordination."[7]

So the Bhaaradvaaja Brahman was received into the homeless life under the Blessed One, and received ordination. And not so long after his ordination the Venerable Bhaaradvaaja, remaining alone and secluded, heedful, ardent and resolute, quickly attained that for which young men of good birth rightly go forth from home into the homeless life, coming to realize for himself, in this present life, the unsurpassed goal of the holy life, realizing that "birth is destroyed, the holy life has been accomplished, what was to be done is done! There is no further life in this world."[8]

And that Bhaaradvaaja became an Arahant.

Notes
1.
Ve.luvan.
2.
Madhur-agga appears to mean "the height (agga) of intoxicating sweetness (madhura)."
3.
He still, to begin with, uses the patronizing address bho Gotama.
4.
Dhamma.
5.
Esaaham: "I" (emphatic)
6.
Pabbajjaa: now the term for the lower ordination as a saama.nera (novice).
7.
Upasampadaa: now the term for the higher ordination as a bhikkhu.
8.
Itthataaya: see Vol. II, n. 51.


7.2 Akkosa Sutta: Insult
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999
Alternate translations: Buddharakkhita | Walshe

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary. Then the brahman Akkosaka[1] Bharadvaja heard that a brahman of the Bharadvaja clan had gone forth from the home life into homelessness in the presence of the Blessed One. Angered & displeased, he went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, insulted & cursed him with rude, harsh words.

When this was said, the Blessed One said to him: "What do you think, brahman: Do friends & colleagues, relatives & kinsmen come to you as guests?"

"Yes, Master Gotama, sometimes friends & colleagues, relatives & kinsmen come to me as guests."

"And what do you think: Do you serve them with staple & non-staple foods & delicacies?"

"Yes, sometimes I serve them with staple & non-staple foods & delicacies."

"And if they don't accept them, to whom do those foods belong?"

"If they don't accept them, Master Gotama, those foods are all mine."

"In the same way, brahman, that with which you have insulted me, who is not insulting; that with which you have taunted me, who is not taunting; that with which you have berated me, who is not berating: that I don't accept from you. It's all yours, brahman. It's all yours.

"Whoever returns insult to one who is insulting, returns taunts to one who is taunting, returns a berating to one who is berating, is said to be eating together, sharing company, with that person. But I am neither eating together nor sharing your company, brahman. It's all yours. It's all yours."

"The king together with his court know this of Master Gotama — 'Gotama the contemplative is an arahant' — and yet still Master Gotama gets angry."[2]

[The Buddha:]
Whence is there anger
for one free from anger,
	tamed,
	living in tune —
one released through right knowing,
	calmed
	& Such.

You make things worse
when you flare up
at someone who's angry.
Whoever doesn't flare up
at someone who's angry
	wins a battle
	hard to win.

You live for the good of both
	— your own, the other's —
when, knowing the other's provoked,
	you mindfully grow calm.

When you work the cure of both
	— your own, the other's —
those who think you a fool
know nothing of Dhamma.
When this was said, the brahman Akkosaka Bharadvaja said to the Blessed One, "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama — through many lines of reasoning — made the Dhamma clear. I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, & to the community of monks. Let me obtain the going forth in Master Gotama's presence, let me obtain admission."

Then the brahman Akkosaka Bharadvaja received the going forth & the admission in the Blessed One's presence. And not long after his admission — dwelling alone, secluded, heedful, ardent, & resolute — he in no long time reached & remained in the supreme goal of the holy life, for which clansmen rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing & realizing it for himself in the here & now. He knew: "Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for the sake of this world." And so Ven. Bharadvaja became another one of the arahants.

Note

1.
= "Insulter."
2.
Akkosaka thinks that the Buddha is cursing him — and thus angry — when actually the Buddha is simply stating a fact in line with the law of kamma.


7.6 Jata Sutta: The Tangle
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998

At Savatthi. Then the brahman Jata[1] Bharadvaja went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After this exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there he addressed the Blessed One with a verse:

A tangle within,
a tangle without,
people are entangled
		in a tangle.
Gotama, I ask you this:
	who can untangle this tangle?

[The Buddha:]
A man established in virtue,
		discerning,
developing discernment & mind,
a monk ardent, astute:
	he can untangle this tangle.

Those whose 	passion,
			aversion,
			& ignorance
		have faded away,
arahants, their effluents ended:
	for them the tangle's untangled.

Where name-&-form,
	along with perception
	of impingement & form,
totally stop without trace:
	that's where the tangle
		is cut.
When this was said, the brahman Jata Bharadvaja said to the Blessed One, "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama — through many lines of reasoning — made the Dhamma clear. I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, & to the community of monks. Let me obtain the going forth in Master Gotama's presence, let me obtain admission."

Then the brahman Jata Bharadvaja received the going forth & the admission in the Blessed One's presence. And not long after his admission — dwelling alone, secluded, heedful, ardent, & resolute — he in no long time reached & remained in the supreme goal of the holy life, for which clansmen rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing & realizing it for himself in the here & now. He knew: "Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for the sake of this world." And so Ven. Bharadvaja became another one of the arahants.

Notes
1.
= "Tangle."


7.11 Kasi Bharadvaja Sutta: To the Plowing Bharadvaja
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1995
Alternate translation: Piyadassi
This sutta also appears at Sn 1.4.

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was living among the Magadhans at Dakkhinagiri in the brahman village of Ekanala. Now at that time approximately 500 of the brahman Kasi Bharadvaja's plows were yoked at the sowing time. Then, in the early morning, putting on his lower robe and taking his bowl & robes, the Blessed One went to where Kasi Bharadvaja was working. Now at that time Kasi Bharadvaja's food-distribution was underway. So the Blessed One went to Kasi Bharadvaja's food-distribution and, on arrival, stood to one side. Kasi Bharadvaja saw the Blessed One standing for alms, and on seeing him, said to him, "I, contemplative, plow & sow. Having plowed & sown, I eat. You, too, contemplative, should plow & sow. Having plowed & sown, you (will) eat."

"I, too, brahman, plow & sow. Having plowed & sown, I eat."

"But, contemplative, I don't see the Master Gotama's yoke or plow, plowshare, goad, or oxen, and yet the Master Gotama says this: 'I, too, brahman, plow & sow. Having plowed & sown, I eat.'"

Then the Kasi Bharadvaja addressed the Blessed One with a verse:

You claim to be a plowman,
but I don't see your plowing.
Being asked, tell us about your plowing
so that we may know your plowing.

[The Buddha:]
Conviction is my seed,
austerity 	my rain,
	discernment my yoke & plow,
conscience 	my pole,
mind 		my yoke-tie,
	mindfulness my plowshare & goad.
Guarded in body,
guarded in speech,
restrained in terms of belly & food,
	I make truth a weeding-hook,
	and composure my unyoking.
Persistence, my beast of burden,
bearing me toward rest from the yoke,
takes me, without turning back,
	to where, having gone,
	one doesn't grieve.
That's how my plowing is plowed.
	It has
	as its fruit
	the deathless.
Having plowed this plowing
	one is unyoked
from all suffering
	& stress.
Then Kasi Bharadvaja, having heaped up milk-rice in a large bronze serving bowl, offered it to the Blessed One, [saying,] "May Master Gotama eat [this] milk-rice. The master is a plowman, for the Master Gotama plows the plowing that has as its fruit the deathless."

What's been chanted over with verses
shouldn't be eaten by me.
That's not the nature, brahman,
of one who's seen rightly.
What's been chanted over with verses
Awakened Ones reject.
	That being their nature, brahman,
	this is their way of life.
Serve with other food & drink
a fully-perfected great seer,
	his fermentations 	ended,
	his anxiety 		stilled,
for that is the field
	for one looking for merit.
"Then to whom, Master Gotama, should I give this milk-rice?"

"Brahman, I don't see that person in this world — with its devas, Maras, & Brahmas, in this generation with its royalty & common people — by whom this milk-rice, having been eaten, would be rightly digested, aside from a Tathagata or a Tathagata's disciple. In that case, brahman, throw the milk-rice away in a place without vegetation, or dump it in water with no living beings."

So Kasi Bharadvaja dumped the milk-rice in water with no living beings. And the milk-rice, when dropped in the water, hissed & sizzled, seethed & steamed. Just as an iron ball heated all day, when tossed in the water, hisses & sizzles, seethes & steams, in the same way the milk-rice, when dropped in the water, hissed & sizzled, seethed & steamed.

Then Kasi Bharadvaja — in awe, his hair standing on end — went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, throwing himself down with his head at the Blessed One's feet, said to him, "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to show the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama — through many lines of reasoning — made the Dhamma clear. I go to Master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the Community of monks. May Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge, from this day forward, for life. Let me obtain the going forth in Master Gotama's presence, let me obtain admission."

Then the brahman Kasi Bharadvaja obtained the going forth in the Blessed One's presence, he obtained admission. And not long after his admission — dwelling alone, secluded, heedful, ardent, & resolute — he in no long time reached & remained in the supreme goal of the celibate life, for which clansmen rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing & realizing it for himself in the here & now. He knew: "Birth is ended, the celibate life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for the sake of this world." And so Ven. Bharadvaja became another one of the arahants.


7.12 Udaya Sutta: Breaking the Cycle
translated from the Pali by
Andrew Olendzki
© 2005

[The Buddha:]

Over and over, the seeds all get planted;
Over and over, the rain-god sprinkles rain.
Over and over, the farmer farms the field;
Over and over, the food grows in the realm.

Over and over, beggars do their begging;
Over and over, the givers give out gifts.
Over and over, the giver who has given;
Over and over, goes to a better place.

Over and over, he tires and he struggles;
Over and over, the fool goes to the womb.
Over and over, he's born and he dies;
Over and over, they bear him to his grave.

But one who's wisdom is wide as the earth
Is not born over and over,
For he's gained the path
Of not becoming over again.

Translator's note

The composers of Pali poetry love to play on words — puns, alliteration, and double intentions abound in the verses that have emerged from the lost world of ancient India. This poem is unique in its thorough repetition of the first phrase, which sets the tone of cyclical activity that drones on and on until the pattern is transformed. Even the pronunciation of punappunam contributes to this: The first two syllables rise up in tone, a pause or break occurs at the double "p's," and then the other two syllables descend (much like we would say in English something like "Is born, then dies.")

Beginning with the cycles of nature and the on-flowing of the growing seasons, the poet (after tying in the rewards of generosity) turns the metaphor of re-turn to the essential Dhamma teaching of the cycles of birth and death that make up samsara, the flowing-on of the deluded from one womb to another. (The "seeds" planted in the first stanza, also meaning the choices we make, are bearing karmic consequences in the third.) Mando (line 10), or confusion, is the narrow limitation of mind that prevents our insight into the impermanence, selflessness and unsatisfactoriness of ourselves and the world. It is transformed by the sort of wisdom that is as far-reaching, tranquil and stable as the wide earth itself — capable of holding everything with equanimity.

The entire poem is about that central Buddhist idea punabbhava, found in the final stanza, which is often translated as "renewed existence" or even "again-becoming." In the process thinking that so characterizes Buddhism, people and things do not "exist" as much as they "become," and this more dynamic form of the verb "to be" is usually preferred in the literature. This life we cling to is merely an episode in a much larger drama of perpetual birth and death, with existence recurring "over and over," and we will never sort it out until we are capable of holding this wider view of our situation.


7.14 Maha-sala Sutta: Very Rich
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999

At Savatthi. Then a certain very rich brahman — shabby, shabbily dressed — went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After this exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there the Blessed One said to him, "Why, brahman, are you shabby & shabbily dressed?"

"Just now, Master Gotama, my four sons — at their wives instigation — threw me out of the house."

"In that case, brahman, memorize these verses and then recite them when a large assembly of people have gathered in the town hall and your sons are sitting there, too.

"Those whose birth
I delighted in
— whose growth I desired —
at their wives instigation
have chased me away,
as dogs would swine.

Wicked & vile,
though they call me 'Dad':
demons in the disguise of sons
who abandon me in old age.

As an old horse
of no more use
is deprived of fodder,
so the elderly father
of those foolish boys
begs at other people's homes.

My staff serves me better
than those disobedient sons.
	It fends off
ferocious bulls
& ferocious curs.
In the dark it goes before me;
down steep slopes, it gives support.
Through the power of my staff,
	when I stumble
	I still stand firm."
Then the very rich brahman, having memorized these verses in the presence of the Blessed One, recited them when a large assembly of people had gathered in the town hall and his sons were sitting there, too:

"Those whose birth
I delighted in
— whose growth I desired —
at their wives instigation
have chased me away,
as dogs would swine.

Wicked & vile,
though they call me 'Dad':
demons in the disguise of sons
who abandon me in old age.

As an old horse
of no more use
is deprived of fodder,
so the elderly father
of those foolish boys
begs at other people's homes.

My staff serves me better
than those disobedient sons.
	It fends off
ferocious bulls
& ferocious curs.
In the dark it goes before me;
down steep slopes, it gives support.
Through the power of my staff,
	when I stumble
	I still stand firm."
Then the brahman's sons, having led him home, bathed him, and each provided him in a pair of cloths. So the brahman, taking one pair of cloths, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, exchanged courteous greetings with him. After this exchange of friendly greetings & courtesies, he sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said to the Blessed One, "We brahmans, Master Gotama, look for a teacher's fee for our teacher. May Master Gotama accept this teacher's portion from me."

The Blessed One accepted it out of sympathy.

Then the very rich brahman said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to point out the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama — through many lines of reasoning — made the Dhamma clear. I go to Master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, & to the community of monks. May Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge from this day forward, for life."


7.17 Navakammika Sutta: The Builder
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying among the Kosalans in a certain forest thicket. Now at that time the brahman Navakammika[1] Bharadvaja was getting some work done in that forest thicket. He saw the Blessed One sitting under a sala tree — his legs folded crosswise, his body held erect, with mindfulness set to the fore. On seeing him, the thought occurred to the brahman: "Here I am, taking delight in getting work done in this forest thicket. But what does this contemplative take delight in getting done?"

So he went to the Blessed One and on arrival recited this verse:

"What jobs are getting done,
	monk in the sala forest?
Alone in the wilderness,
	in what does Gotama
		find delight?"

[The Buddha:]
I have no work
to do in the forest.
The forest of restless dancing about
	I've cut
	at the root.
Though in the forest, I'm
	deforested,
	de-arrowed.
I delight 	alone,
	discontent cast away.
When this was said, the brahman Navakammika Bharadvaja said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what was overturned, to reveal what was hidden, to point out the way to one who was lost, or to carry a lamp into the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way has Master Gotama — through many lines of reasoning — made the Dhamma clear. I go to Master Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma, & to the community of monks. May Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge from this day forward, for life."

Notes
1.
= "Builder."


7.18 Katthaharaka Sutta: Firewood-gathering
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 2005
Alternate translation: Olendzki (excerpt)

Translator's note: The poetic exchange in this discourse emphasizes the difference between appearances and actual vision. The brahman addressing the Buddha speaks in terms of conjecture and uses three compounds containing the word "rupa," or "appearance" — gambhira-rupa, sucaru-rupa, and acchera-rupa (deep-looking, very-lovely-looking, and amazing-looking). The Buddha, however, emphasizes not his appearance but what he sees. What's important about him is not how he looks to others, but how he looks at things.

Another contrast is that, whereas the brahman conjectures about the goal the Buddha is striving for in the wilderness — attaining the heavens of the Brahmas — the Buddha points out that he has already arrived at a goal that is hidden even to Brahmas.

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying among the Kosalans in a certain forest grove. Then a large number of firewood-gathering youths — students of a certain brahman of the Bharadvaja clan — went to the forest grove. On arrival, they saw the Blessed One sitting in the grove — his legs folded crosswise, his body set straight, mindfulness established to the fore. On seeing him, they went to the brahman of the Bharadvaja clan and, on arrival, said to him, "Sir, you should know that Gotama the contemplative is in that grove over there, sitting with his legs folded crosswise, his body set straight, mindfulness established to the fore."

So the brahman of the Bharadvaja clan, together with the youths, went to the forest grove. On arrival, he saw the Blessed One sitting in the grove — his legs folded crosswise, his body set straight, mindfulness established to the fore. On seeing him, he went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, addressed him in verse:

In the deep-looking forest,
teeming with terrors,
having plunged into the wilderness
 — desolate, empty —
unflinchingly, steadfastly, compellingly,
you practice jhana, monk:
How very lovely you look!

Where no song is sung,
where no music is played,
alone in the wilderness:
the forest-dwelling sage.
This looks amazing to me —
that you live alone in the forest
with rapturous mind.

I suppose it's in longing
for the three heavens unexcelled,
in the company of the ruling lord of the worlds,
that, staying here in the wilderness, desolate,
you practice austerities
for attaining Brahma.

[The Buddha:]
Whatever the longings or delights
attached — always —
to various levels of being,
or yearnings born
from the root of unknowing:
I've destroyed them all,
down to the root.

I —
without longing,
unattached,
uninvolved,
with purified vision
with regard to all things,
having reached self-awakening,
sublime, unexcelled —
practice jhana hidden from Brahma,
matured.[1] 
Note

1.
In the PTS edition of the Pali canon, this last line reads, jhaayaam'aham braahma.na raho vissaarado — "I practice jhana, brahman, in seclusion, matured." This, however, does not fit in with the rhythm of the verse, and so for that reason I have followed the Thai edition here — jhaayaam'aham brahma-raho visaarado — which does fit in with the rhythm. This reading also has the advantage of providing a neat contrast to the reference to Brahma in the brahman's last line
The compound brahma-raho, "Brahma-private," can be read in either of two ways: either private like a Brahma or private to — i.e., hidden from — Brahma. The first reading would simply convey the fact that the practice of jhana puts one in a mental state equivalent to a Brahma. The second reading points to the fact that the Buddha, in having gained Awakening, meditates in a way that even Brahmas cannot perceive or understand. I have chosen this latter reading because it parallels the message in AN 11.10.


7.21 Sangaarava Sutta: Sangaarava
translated from the Pali by
Maurice O'Connell Walshe
© 2007
The Pali title of this sutta is based on the PTS (Feer) edition.

[At Saavatthii] At that time the brahman Sangaarava was living there, a "purity-by-water" man who believed in purification by water: his practice was to go down into the water every evening and every morning. Now the Venerable Aananda, rising early, took his robe and bowl and went into Saavatthii for alms. [Returning he went to the Blessed One and said:] "It would be well, Lord, if the Blessed One were to visit the dwelling of Sangaarava the Brahman, out of compassion for him."

The Blessed One silently consented. [Having visited him, the Blessed One said:] "Is it true, brahman, that you are a 'purity-by-water' man... that you go down to the water every evening and morning?"

"Yes, good Gotama."

"What benefit do you expect from [this practice]?"

"It is like this, good Gotama. The evil deeds that I do in the day I cause to be borne away in the evening, and the evil deeds that I do in the night I cause to be borne away in the morning. That is the benefit I expect from [this practice.]"

[The Blessed One said:]
Dhamma is a lake, virtue's the ford,[1] 
Undefiled, which good men praise to others:
Men of wisdom come and bathe therein,
Then, clean of limb, they reach the Other Shore.
At these words the Brahman Sangaarava said to the Blessed One: "Excellent... [as in SN 7.1, but ending:] I go to the Lord Gotama for refuge, to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of monks. May the Lord Gotama accept me as a lay-disciple who has taken refuge in him from this day forth as long as life shall last."

Notes
1.
Tittha "ford" also means "bathing-place." There is an intentional play on both meanings of the word here.