/*title*/Messages from the Universal House of Justice: 1963-1986
Third Epoch of the Formative Age

by Universal House of Justice

[Riḍván messages omitted. Please see Universal House of Justice > Riḍván Message]


/*chapter*/Chapter 1

OCCASION WORLDWIDE CELEBRATIONS MOST GREAT JUBILEE COMMEMORATING CENTENARY ASCENSION BAHA'U'LLAH THRONE HIS SOVEREIGNTY WITH HEARTS OVERFLOWING GRATITUDE HIS UNFAILING PROTECTION OVERFLOWING BOUNTIES JOYOUSLY ANNOUNCE FRIENDS EAST WEST ELECTION SUPREME LEGISLATIVE BODY ORDAINED BY HIM IN HIS MOST HOLY BOOK PROMISED BY HIM RECEIVE HIS INFALLIBLE GUIDANCE. MEMBERS FIRST HISTORIC HOUSE JUSTICE DULY ELECTED BY DELEGATES COMPRISING MEMBERS FIFTY-SIX NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES ARE CHARLES WOLCOTT ALI NAKHJAVANI H BORRAH KAVELIN IAN SEMPLE LUTFU'LLAH HAKIM DAVID HOFMAN HUGH CHANCE AMOZ GIBSON HUSHMAND FATHFAZAM. TO JUBILATION ENTIRE BAHA'I WORLD VICTORIOUS COMPLETION BELOVED GUARDIAN'S UNIQUE CRUSADE NOW ADDED HUMBLE GRATITUDE PROFOUND THANKSGIVING FOLLOWERS BAHA'U'LLAH FOR ERECTION UNIVERSAL HOUSE JUSTICE AUGUST BODY TO WHOM ALL BELIEVERS MUST TURN WHOSE DESTINY IS TO GUIDE UNFOLDMENT HIS EMBRYONIC WORLD ORDER THROUGH ADMINISTRATIVE INSTITUTIONS PRESCRIBED BY BAHA'U'LLAH ELABORATED BY `ABDU'L-BAHÁ LABORIOUSLY ERECTED BY SHOGHI EFFENDI AND ENSURE EARLY DAWN GOLDEN AGE FAITH WHEN THE WORD OF THE LORD WILL COVER THE EARTH AS THE WATERS COVER THE SEA. 

HAIFA, 22 APRIL 1963 HANDSFAITH 


/*chapter*/Foreword 

On 21 April 1963, one hundred years after Bahá'u'lláh's public declaration of His world-redeeming mission, the first International Bahá'í Convention was held on the majestic slopes of Mount Carmel in Haifa, Israel. The purpose of this momentous gathering was to elect, for the first time, the Universal House of Justice, the supreme governing and legislative body of the Bahá'í Faith. 

The election of the Universal House of Justice was greeted with great joy by the worldwide Bahá'í community, for it ensured the continuation of divine guidance until the advent of the next Manifestation of God, thereby fulfilling the prophecy that there would come a "Day which shall not be followed by night." 

The continuation of divine guidance-the primary theme of this Book is a unique feature of the Bahá'í Faith. Unlike any of the Manifestations of God Who preceded Him, Bahá'u'lláh, the Founder of the Bahá'í Faith, made a Covenant with His followers to direct and channel the forces released by His Revelation, guaranteeing the continuity of infallible guidance after His death through institutions to which all of His followers must turn. In His will and testament Bahá'u'lláh designated His eldest son, Abdu'l-Bahá, His successor, the authoritative Interpreter of His writings, and the Center of His Covenant. In His own will and testament 'Abdu'l-Bahá perpetuated the Covenant through the Administrative Order ordained in Bahá'u'lláh's writings. 'Abdu'l-Bahá appointed as His twin successors the institutions of the Guardianship and the Universal House of Justice. He named His eldest grandson, Shoghi Effendi, the Guardian of the Cause of God and expounder of the Word of God, while giving the Universal House of Justice the role of legislating on matters not explicitly revealed in the writings of Bahá'u'lláh and 'Abdu'l-Bahá or dealt with by Shoghi Effendi. 

Writing about the Universal House of Justice, Bahá'u'lláh explained that, "Inasmuch as for each day there is a new problem and for every problem an expedient solution, such affairs should be referred to the Ministers of the House of Justice that they may act according to the needs and Requirements of the time.... It is incumbent upon all to be obedient unto them." Moreover, 'Abdu'l-Bahá asserts in His Will and Testament that "Unto the Most Holy Book every one must turn, and all that is not expressly recorded therein must be referred to the Universal House of Justice. That which this body, whether unanimously or by a majority doth carry, that is verily the Truth and the Purpose of God Himself." 

Thus the fundamental purpose of the Universal House of Justice is to ensure the continuity of the divine guidance that flows from the Source of the Faith, to safeguard the unity of its followers, and to maintain the integrity and flexibility of its teachings. Its origin, its authority, its duties, and its sphere of action are all derived from the writings of Bahá'u'lláh. His writings, along with those of Abdu'l-Bahá and of Shoghi Effendi constitute its bedrock foundation and its binding terms of reference. 

Messages from the Universal House of Justice, 1963-1986. - The Third Epoch of the Formative Age brings together letters, cables, telexes, and electronic mail messages sent to Bahá'í institutions and individuals during a twenty-three-year period that the Universal House of Justice has called the Third Epoch of the Formative Age of the Faith. The Formative Age stands between the Heroic Age (1844-1921), which is associated with the ministries of the Bab (the Prophet-Herald of the Bahá'í Faith), Bahá'u'lláh, and Abdu'l-Bahá, and the Golden Age, which will witness the dawning of the Most Great Peace, the emergence of a commonwealth of all the nations of the world, and the advent of the Kingdom of God on earth. 

The First Epoch of the Formative Age (1921-44/46) saw the birth of the Bahá'í Administrative Order and the primary stages in the erection of its framework. This epoch was characterized by its focus on forming local and national institutions in all the continents, thereby laying the foundation needed to support future systematic teaching activities. 

The First Epoch also witnessed the initiation of the first Seven Year Plan (1937-44), at the direction of Shoghi Effendi, by the Bahá'ís of the United States and Canada. This plan, inspired by 'Abdu'l-Bahá's Tablets of the Divine Plan, constituted the Bahá'í community's first systematic teaching campaign and began the initial stage of carrying out 'Abdu'l-Bahá's Divine Plan in the Western Hemisphere. 

The Second Epoch of the Formative Age (1946-63) witnessed the further development and maturation of the Administrative Order and the execution of a series of teaching plans that carried the Faith beyond the confines of the Western Hemisphere and Europe. Its two most distinguishing characteristics were the rise and steady consolidation of the World Center of the Faith in Haifa, including the appointment of the Hands of the Cause of God, the introduction of the Auxiliary Boards, and the establishment of the International Bahá'í Council, and the simultaneous and often spontaneous prosecution of Bahá'í national plans in both the East and the West. Shoghi Effendi now used the internally consolidated and administratively experienced National Spiritual Assemblies to launch the Ten Year World Crusade (1953-63) in which he summoned the twelve existing National Spiritual Assemblies to participate in one concentrated, united effort to spread the Faith more widely throughout the world. This enterprise resulted in the opening Of 131 countries to the Faith, the formation of forty-four National Spiritual Assemblies, and a vast increase in the ethnic diversity of the Bahá'í community. However, the victorious completion of the Ten Year World Crusade came with a heavy price. In 1957, midway through the Crusade, Shoghi Effendi died unexpectedly of a heart attack. The Bahá'ís were devastated. Not only were they deprived of their Guardian, but they were also deprived of their source of divine guidance. The Guardianship was a hereditary office, and Shoghi Effendi had left no heir. 

How would the unity of the Faith be preserved? How could the conflict and contention that has divided other religions be prevented? Clearly, unless the Bahá'í Faith could safeguard its unity, it could never hope to unify a sorely divided world. Into this chasm of doubt and despair stepped the Hands of the Cause of God, whom Shoghi Effendi had appointed and to whom he had referred as the "Chief Stewards of Bahá'u'lláh's embryonic World Commonwealth who have been invested by the unerring Pen of the Center of His Covenant with the dual function of guarding over the security, and of insuring the propagation, of His Father's Faith." Through their heroic stewardship they guided the community along the course Shoghi Effendi had set. By the end of the nearly six-year interregnum they had not only preserved the unity of the Faith but also inspired a surge of sacrificial service leading to the Ten Year Crusade's victorious conclusion and crowning achievement, the culminating event of the Second Epoch-the election of the Universal House of Justice. 

The Universal House of Justice proclaimed in a letter dated October 1963 that the Third Epoch of the Formative Age had begun. Outlining what would become the distinctive characteristics of the new epoch, it said the Bahá'í Faith "must now grow rapidly in size, increase its spiritual cohesion and executive ability, develop its institutions and extend its influence into all strata of society." Moreover, its members, must, by constant study of the life-giving Word, and by dedicated service, deepen in spiritual understanding and show to the world a mature, responsible, fundamentally assured and happy way of life, far removed from the passions, prejudices and distractions of present day society. 

The Third Epoch called the Bahá'ís of the world to a yet more mature level of functioning that would be consistent with expected vast increases in the community's size and diversity, its emergence as a model to humankind, and the extension of its influence in the world at large. 

The nature of individual and community maturity for which the Universal House of Justice called is evident as one reads the book. Through the release of translations and compilations of Bahá'í writings and through a voluminous correspondence in which perplexing questions about various personal and social problems are discussed, the Universal House of Justice guides individuals and communities in their efforts to live a Bahá'í life. Matters of spiritual growth, sexual morality, relations between husband and wife, family life, prejudice, politics, possession of firearms, ranks and stations in the Faith, the tests of Bahá'í community life, and the suffering of humanity are a few of the topics of individual and community life that are addressed. Numerous accounts of the vicious persecution of the Iranian Bahá'ís and of their efforts and the efforts of the Bahá'í communities around the world to help them testify to the spiritual and administrative maturation of the worldwide Bahá'í community. 

The increasing maturity of the worldwide Bahá'í community is further evidenced as the Universal House of Justice guides the Bahá'í community to progressively more mature levels of functioning through three major world teaching plans conducted during the Third Epoch of the Formative Age: the Nine Year Plan (1964-73), the Five Year Plan (1974-79), and the Seven Year Plan (1979-86). Among the results and achievements won during these three plans are the faiths gradual emergence from obscurity, its assumption by the Universal House of Justice of the role of a promoter of world peace, the initiation of activities intended to foster social and economic development, the establishment of the Continental Boards of Counselors and the International Teaching Center, the introduction of assistants to the Auxiliary Boards, and one of the crowning events of the Third Epoch-the construction and occupation of the seat of the Universal House of Justice at the World Center of the Faith. 

The publication of Messages from the Universal House of Justice, 1963-1986. The Third Epoch of the Formative Age comes ten years after the inauguration of the Fourth Epoch. Although the Bahá'í Faith is well into this new stage of development, and new patterns of growth and change are evident, yet the study of the messages contained in this volume yields a treasure of insight, knowledge, and understanding of the principles guiding the unfoldment of the Bahá'í Faith and the efforts of individuals and communities as they strive to adopt the pattern of life prescribed by Bahá'u'lláh. Moreover, the inclusion of virtually every major message of the Third Epoch enables one to survey significant developments in the organic growth of the Bahá'í world community, to follow its increasing maturity and acquisition of new powers and capacities, to perceive a continuity in its development, and to detect patterns in the interplay between the forces of light and darkness, between crisis and victory. Individuals, communities, and institutions will find the book an important aid in making decisions as they apply themselves to meeting current challenges and will derive continual inspiration and encouragement from the majestic pronouncements, authoritative elucidations, and ennobling, luminous, and loving counsels of the Universal House of Justice. The messages themselves are sufficient proof that the Covenant of Bahá'u'lláh is unbroken, that the channel of divine guidance remains open, and that "the Day which shall not be followed by night" has at last dawned upon the world. 

NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLY OF THE BAHA'IS OF THE UNITED STATES 



/*chapter*/A Note from the Compiler 

Messages from the Universal House of Justice, 1963-1986.- The Third Epoch of the Formative Age brings under one cover 456 letters, cables, telexes, and electronic mail messages from the Universal House of Justice to Bahá'í institutions, to Bahá'ís gathered at special events, to individuals, or -- in one case -- to the peoples of the world. 

A volume long overdue, it enlarges upon and replaces two earlier compilations of messages: Wellspring of Guidance: Messages, 1963-1968, published in 1969, and Messages from the Universal House of Justice, 1968-1973, published in 1976. In preparing the new volume several factors where considered. First was the need to make available the messages contained in the first two compilations and to add thirty-six messages from the 1963 through 1973 period that had not been included. Second was the need to publish messages received after 1973. Thus it was decided to publish a new volume that would encompass and expand upon the first two books. 

The time frame of the new volume became clear in January 1986 when the Universal House of justice announced the closing of the Third Epoch (1963-1986) and the inception of the Fourth Epoch, signaled by new developments in the maturation of the institutions of the Faith. Hence Messages from the Universal House of Justice, 1963-1986 enables the reader to survey the full sweep of the Third Epoch, beginning with the first message issued by the Universal House of Justice after its establishment in 1963 and ending with the annual Ridvan message of 1986. The messages record the progress of the Faith through the Nine, Five, and Seven Year Plans, chronicling extraordinary advances in proclamation, expansion, and consolidation. They reach a climax in the last two years of the Seven Year Plan with the Faith's emergence from obscurity, the release of a statement on peace addressed to the peoples of the world, and the inception of the Fourth Epoch of the Formative Age. These and countless other achievements stand in marked contrast to the contemporaneous persecution of the Bahá'ís of Iran, throwing into sharp relief the interplay between crisis and victory. The dynamic interaction between these two forces is a chief characteristic of the unfoldment of the Bahá'í Faith and a prominent theme in this volume. 

Messages from the Universal House of Justice, 1963-1986 includes numerous features that have been introduced for the reader's convenience. A table of epochs of the Heroic and Formative Ages of the Bahá'í Faith and a list of significant milestones, anniversaries, and events in the Third Epoch offer a brief overview of recent Bahá'í history. Each message has been given a heading and assigned a number, and the paragraphs or other divisions of text within the messages have been numbered to facilitate reference. An extensive index is included, its locators corresponding to the numbering system used in the text. Subheadings have been added to many longer messages; spellings have been Americanized; and, for consistency, dates have been given in a day-month year format. Addressees, salutations, and complimentary closings have been retained, except for a few cases in which confidentiality required their omission. Because the compilation of messages covers almost a quarter of a century, footnotes have been added to explain historical details, allusions, technical terms, sources of most quotations, cross references to other messages on the same topic, and references to further details in the glossary or in other books. To help keep the notes as brief as possible, the titles of many Bahá'í books were abbreviated. A list of abbreviations and the titles they stand for appears at the front of the book. A glossary has been included to give background information and define technical Bahá'í terms. A bibliography provides information about books and compilations referred to in the text and footnotes. 

No changes have been made to the texts of the messages without explicit permission from the Universal House of Justice. Extracts from the writings of Bahá'u'lláh, the Bab, and Abdu'l-Bahá that are quoted in the messages have been checked against authenticated sources and authorized translations and have been updated accordingly where appropriate. Noticeable changes in the translations of such extracts are footnoted. The dates of certain cables may differ slightly from those of the same cables published elsewhere because cables of general interest that were addressed to a specific National Spiritual Assembly were usually conveyed to other National Spiritual Assemblies by mail a few days later. In such cases the date of the original cable is used. 

Occasionally the reader will encounter references to enclosures or attachments, such as compilations and lists of pioneer assignments given to National Spiritual Assemblies. Such enclosures have been omitted because of space limitations. Most of the compilations have already been published, and, wherever possible, a reference to the published work is given. 

We would like to express our deepest appreciation to the Universal House of Justice for its assistance in making available many messages that were previously unpublished and particularly for its direction in all phases of the production of this volume. Thanks are due to Ivor Stoakley, Diane Taherzadeh, and Lewis Walker for their assistance with footnotes and glossary entries; to John Walbridge for helpful comments on the glossary; to Dr. Manuchihr Derakhshani for assistance with Persian and Arabic transliterations; to Dr. Betty J. Fisher and Terry J. Cassiday of the Bahá'í Publishing Trust whose insights, scholarship, hard work, and close attention to detail have been invaluable; and to my wife, Amy, for her unwavering encouragement and support. We hope this book will prove to be a useful and convenient source of guidance and inspiration for both individuals and institutions the world over as they strive to serve the Cause of Bahá'u'lláh and carry the healing balm of His teachings to all humanity. 

GEOFFRY W. MARKS 



/*chapter*/List of Abbreviations 

ABL 'Abdu'l-Bahá in London ADJ The Advent of Divine Justice, 1990 ed. BA Bahá'í Administration BN Bahá'í News BNE Bahá'u'lláh and the New Era BP Bahá'í Prayers, 1991 U.S. ed. BW 9 The Bahá'í World, Volume IX BW 13 The Bahá'í Work Volume XIII BW 14 The Bahá'í World, Volume XIV BW 15 The Bahá'í World, Volume XV BW 16 The Bahá'í World, Volume XVI BW 17 The Bahá'í World, Volume XWI BW 18 The Bahá'í World, Volume XVIII BW 19 The Bahá'í World, Volume XIX CC The Compilation of Compilations CF Citadel of Faith CUHJ Constitution of the Universal House of Justice DB The Dawn-Breakers DND Dawn of a New Day ESW Epistle to the Son of the Wolf FSTS From Strength to Strength GPB God Passes By GWB Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá'u'lláh KA The Kitab-i-Aqdas KI The Kitab-i-Iqan LFG Letters from the Guardian to Australia and New Zealand LG Lights of Guidance MA Messages to America MBW Messages to the Bahá'í World MC Messages to Canada MF Memorials of the Faithful PB The Proclamation of Bahá'u'lláh PDIC The Promised Day Is Come, 1996 ed. PM Prayers and Meditations PP The Priceless Pearl PT Paris Talks PUP The Promulgation of Universal Peace, 1982 ed. SAQ Some Answered Questions, 1984 ed. SBS Selections from Bahá'í Scriptures SC Synopsis and Codification of the Kitab-i-Aqdas SDC The Secret of Divine Civilization SWAB Selections from the Writings of Abdu'l-Bahá TABA Tablets of Abdu'l-Bahá Abbas TB Tablets of Bahá'u'lláh Revealed after the Kitab-i-Aqdas TDP Tablets of the Divine Plan, 1992 ed. TN A Travelers Narrative UD Unfolding Destiny WOB The World Order of Bahá'u'lláh WT Will and Testament of Abdu'l-Bahá 



/*chapter*/Epochs of the Heroic Age 

1844-1853 The First Epoch 
The Babi Dispensation 

1853-1892 The Second Epoch 
The Ministry of Bahá'u'lláh 

1892-1921 The Third Epoch 
The Ministry of 'Abdu'l-Bahá 


___ 1. Based on the attachment to the letter dated 5 February 1986 from the Universal House of Justice to all National Spiritual Assemblies. See message no. 451. 



/*chapter*/Epochs of the Formative Age 

1921-1944/46 The First Epoch 

1921-1936 Period of Preparation 1937-1944 The first Seven Year Plan of the Bahá'ís of the United States and Canada 1944-1946 Consolidation of victories 

1946-1963 The Second Epoch 

1946-1953 The second Seven Year Plan of the Bahá'ís of the United States and plans of varying duration pursued by nine other regional and national Bahá'í communities (Canada; Central America and South America; Australia and New Zealand; India, Pakistan, and Burma; the British Isles; Germany and Austria; Persia; Egypt; Iraq)[1] 

1953-1963 The Ten Year World Crusade 

1963-1986 The Third Epoch 

1963-1964...........Year of Preparation 
1964-1973 ...........Nine Year Plan 
1973-1974............Year of Preparation 
1974-1979............Five Year Plan 
1979-1986 ............Seven Year Plan 

___ 1. Based on the attachment to the letter dated 5 February 1986 from the Universal House of Justice to all National Spiritual Assemblies. See message no. 451. 


1986- The Fourth Epoch 

1986-1992 ...Six Year Plan 
1992-1993 ...Holy Year Commemorating the Ascension of Bahá'u'lláh and the Inauguration of His Covenant 
1993-1996 ...Three Year Plan 
1996-2000.... Four Year Plan 


/*chapter*/The Third Epoch - Significant Milestones, Anniversaries, and Events Milestones 

Ridvan 1963 First election of the Universal House of Justice April 28-May 2 1963 First Bahá'í World Congress commemorating Bahá'u'lláh's declaration of His mission and the victorious consummation of the Ten Year World Crusade Ridvan 1964 Inauguration of the Third Epoch with the launching of the Nine Year Plan 

Ridvan 1973 End of the Nine Year Plan 

Naw-Ruz 1974 Beginning of the Five Year Plan Ridvan 1979 End of the Five Year Plan Beginning of the Seven Year Plan 

January 1986 Inauguration of the Fourth Epoch Ridvan 1986 End of the Seven Year Plan Beginning of the Six Year Plan 


Significant Anniversaries 

26 March 1966 Fiftieth anniversary of the revelation of the first Tablets of the Divine Plan 

April 1963 Centenary of Bahá'u'lláh's public declaration of His Mission 

September/ Celebration of the centenary of Bahá'u'lláh's October 1967 proclamation to the Kings 

27 September 1967 Celebration of the centenary of the revelation of the Suriy-i-Muluk 

12 November 1967 Sesquicentennial of the Birth of Bahá'u'lláh 

31 August 1968 Centenary of the arrival of Bahá'u'lláh in the Holy Land 

23 June 1968 Centenary of the passing of Mirza Mihdi, the Purest Branch 

28 November 1971 Fiftieth anniversary of the passing of 'Abdu'l-Bahá 1973 Centenary of the revelation of the Kitab-i-Aqdas June 1977 Centenary of the termination of Bahá'u'lláh's confinement in 'Akka July 1982 Fiftieth anniversary of the passing of the Greatest Holy Leaf 4 November 198-2 Twenty-fifth anniversary of the passing of Shoghi Effendi 

Significant Events Ridvan 1963 Convening of 1st International Bahá'í Convention, Haifa, and election of the Universal House of Justice Ridvan 1964 Launching of the Nine Year Plan 

July 1964 Dedication of the Mother Temple of Europe, Langenhain, near Frankfurt am Main, Germany November 1965 Purification of the Most Holy Tomb October 1967 Opening of a period of proclamation inaugurated by the presentation by the Universal House of Justice to 140 heads of state of a special edition of The Proclamation of Bahá'u'lláh Commemoration of the centenary of Bahá'u'lláh's proclamation to the kings with the holding of six intercontinental conferences in Panama City, Panama; Wilmette, Illinois, U.S.A.; Sydney, Australia; Kampala, Uganda; Frankfurt am Main, Germany; and New Delhi, India Assumption by the Universal House of Justice of representation of the Bahá'í International Community at the United Nations October 1967 Laying of the foundation stone of the Mother Temple of Latin America, Panama City, Panama 

February 1968 Embracing of the Faith by His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II of Western Samoa Ridvan 1968 Convening of the 2nd International Bahá'í Convention, Haifa, and election of the Universal House of Justice June 1968 Establishment of the Continental Boards of Counsellors August 1968 Commemoration of the centenary of Bahá'u'lláh's arrival in the Holy Land with the holding of First Oceanic Conference, Palermo, Sicily 

February 1970 Bahá'í International Community's attainment of consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council August 1970-Holding of eight oceanic and continental conferences September 1971 in La Paz, Bolivia; Rose Hill, Mauritius; Monrovia, Liberia; Djakarta, Indonesia; Suva, Fiji; Kingston, Jamaica; Sapporo, Japan; Reykjavik, Iceland 

April 28 - May 2 1972 Dedication of the Mother Temple of Latin America, Panama City, Panama June 1972 Announcement of the decision to build the Seat of the Universal House of Justice September 1972 Murder of three Iranian Bahá'í students in the Philippine Islands November 1972 Adoption of the Constitution of the Universal House of Justice March 1973 Purchase of the Mazra'ih Mansion 

Ridvan 1973 Convening of the 3rd International Bahá'í Convention, Haifa, and election of the Universal House of Justice Publication of A Synopsis and Codification of the Laws and Ordinances of the Kitab-i-Aqdas May 1973 Announcement of the embracing of the Bahá'í Faith by His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II of Western Samoa 

June 1973 Establishment of the International Teaching Center 

February 1974 Acceptance of the design for the seat of the Universal House of Justice Ridvan 1974 Launching of the Five Year Plan January 1975 Acquisition of the House of Abdu'llah Pasha in 'Akka 

April 1975 Excavation of the site of the seat of the Universal House of justice 

July 1976 Holding of eight international teaching conferences January 1977 in Helsinki, Finland; Anchorage, Alaska; Paris, France; Nairobi, Kenya; Hong Kong; Auckland, New Zealand; Bahá'í, Brazil; and Merida, Mexico. September 1976 Visit of His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II to the resting-place of Shoghi Effendi in London, England 

May 1977 Murder of Ruhu'llah Taymuri-Muqaddam, an Iranian homefront pioneer, in his home by fanatics 

October 1977 Laying of foundation stone for Mother Temple of Indian subcontinent, New Delhi, December 1977 

Initiation of broadcasting by the first Bahá'í radio station, Otavalo, Ecuador Ridvan 1978 

Convening of the 4th International Bahá'í Convention, Haifa, and election of the Universal House of Justice August 1978 

Inauguration of Radio Bahá'í Ecuador December 1978 - 
Intensification of the persecution of January 1979 the Bahá'ís in Iran January 1979 
Laying of the foundation stone of the Mother Temple of the Pacific Islands Naw-Ruz 1979 
Launching of the Seven Year Plan June 1979 
Fixing of Counselors' term of service at five years June-July 1979 
Numerous appeals made by Local Spiritual Assemblies around the world to Ayatollah Khomeini, asking him to stop the persecution of the Bahá'ís of June-August 1979 
Addresses by H. Borrah Kavelin, representative of the Universal House of Justice, at a series of significant meetings in North America and Europe about the importance of redeeming the Iranian Bahá'ís sacrifices through service to the Faith September 1979 
Demolition of the House of the Bab in November 1979 
Arrest of a member of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá'ís of December 1979 
Commencement of excavation of the site of the Mother Temple of the Pacific Islands, Apia, Western Samoa July 1980 
Commencement of construction of Mother Temple of the Indian Subcontinent, New Delhi, India August 1980 
Arrest of all nine members of the National Spiritual Assembly of Iran and two Auxiliary Board members November 1980 
Appointment of a new contingent of Continental Counselors to a five-year term of service January 1981 Execution of chairman of National Spiritual Assembly of Iran May 1981 Establishment of a European Branch Office of the Bahá'í International Community August 1981 
Increase in the severity of the persecution of the Bahá'ís of Iran 

November 1981 Arrest of six members of National Spiritual Assembly of Iran Inauguration of Radio Bahá'í Peru December 1981 Demolition of the House of Bahá'u'lláh in Takur Arrest and execution of eight members of the National Spiritual Assembly 

May-September 1982 Holding of five international conferences in Lagos, Nigeria; Montreal, Canada; Quito, Ecuador; Dublin, Ireland; and Canberra, Australia 
July 1982 By-election to replace one member of the Universal House of Justice 
December 1982 Establishment of first Bahá'í radio station in North America 
January 1983 Occupation by the Universal House of Justice of its permanent seat 
April 1983 opening of the House of Abdu'llah Pasha to pilgrims 
Ridvan 1983Convening of the 5th International Bahá'í Convention, Haifa, and election of the Universal House of Justice 
May 1983 Increase in the responsibilities of the International Teaching Center Public defense of the Bahá'ís of Iran by the President of the United States 
June 1983 Execution of seventeen Bahá'ís in Shiraz, including ten women Call for the youth of the world to vindicate the martyred youth of Shiraz 
August 1983 Banning of Bahá'í administration in Iran 
September 1983 Sending of an open letter from the National Spiritual Assembly of Iran to the authorities responding to the false charges made against the Bahá'í community 
October 1983 Call for Bahá'í involvement in social and economic development activities 
April 1984Attempt to achieve false confessions from the Bahá'ís of Iran by use of torture Inauguration of Radio Bahá'í Bolivia August 1984 Dedication of the Mother Temple of the Pacific Islands, Apia, Western Samoa 

July 1985 Release of compilation on the Law of Huququ'llah Establishment of Public Information Office at the Bahá'í World Centre 
October 1985 Release by the Universal House of Justice of a statement on peace addressed to the peoples of the world 

Appointment of a new and expanded contingent of members of the Continental Boards of Counsellors November 1985 Presentation of the peace statement to the Secretary General of the United Nations 
December 1985 Emergence of the Bahá'í Faith from obscurity signaled by adoption of a resolution by the United Nations General Assembly supporting the Iranian Bahá'í community 

December 1985 - Conference of the Continental Boards of Counselor 
January 1986 in the Holy Land with Hands of the Cause of God, members of the Universal House of Justice, and the International Teaching Center 
January 1986 Announcement of the beginning of the Fourth Epoch of the Formative Age by the Universal House of Justice in a letter to the Bahá'ís of the world Inauguration of Radio Bahá'í Pan 
February 1986 Setting of date for dedication of Mother Temple of the Indian Subcontinent, New Delhi, India Invitation from the Universal House of Justice to National Spiritual Assemblies and Continental Counselors to consult about national goals within the framework of the major objectives of the Six Year Plan set by the Universal House of Justice 
Ridvan 1986 Review by the Universal House of justice of achievements of the Seven Year Plan, comments on the Faith's emergence from obscurity and the maturation of the institutions of the Cause and announcement of World Center goals of publishing an English translation of the Kitab-i-Aqdas, education of the Bahá'ís about the law of Huququ'llah, planning for the completion of the remaining buildings on the Arc, and broadening the basis of the international relations of the Faith Launching of the Six Year Plan. 


1963-1964 - A Year of Preparation
/*chapter*/Statement to the First Bahá’í World Congress[2]
30 April 1963
1.1 "All praise, O my God, be to Thee Who art the Source of all glory and majesty, of greatness and honor, of sovereignty and dominion, of loftiness and grace, of awe and power. Whomsoever Thou willest Thou causest to draw nigh unto the Most Great Ocean, and on whomsoever Thou desirest Thou conferrest the honor of recognizing Thy Most Ancient Name. Of all who are in heaven and on earth, none can withstand the operation of Thy sovereign Will. From all eternity Thou didst rule the entire creation, and Thou wilt continue for evermore to exercise Thy dominion over all created things. There is none other God but Thee, the Almighty, the Most Exalted, the All-Powerful, the All-Wise."[3]

1.2 Beloved friends: On this glorious occasion, the celebration of the Most Great Jubilee, we raise our grateful thanks to Bahá’u’lláh for all His bounties showered upon the friends throughout the world. This historic moment marks at one and the same time the fulfillment of Daniel's prophecy, the hundredth anniversary of the Declaration of the Promised One of all ages, the termination of the first epoch of the Divine Plan of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá designed to establish the Faith of God in all the world, and the successful conclusion of our beloved Guardian's world-encircling Crusade, enabling his lovers and loved ones everywhere to lay this glorious harvest of victory in his name at the feet of the Blessed Beauty.[4] This Most Great Jubilee is the crowning victory of the life work of Shoghi Effendi, Guardian of the Cause of God. He it was, and he alone, who unfolded the potentialities of the widely scattered, numerically small, and largely unorganized Bahá’í community which had been called into being during the Heroic Age of the Faith.[5] He it was who unfolded the grand design of God's Holy Cause; set in motion the great plans of teaching already outlined by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá; established the institutions and greatly extended the endowments at the World Center, and raised the Temples of America, Africa, Australasia, and Europe; developed the Administrative Order of the Cause throughout the world; and set the ark of the Cause true on its course. He appointed the Hands of the Cause of God.

1.3 The paeans of joy and gratitude, of love and adoration which we now raise to the throne of Bahá’u’lláh would be inadequate, and the celebrations of this Most Great Jubilee in which, as promised by our beloved Guardian, we are now engaged would be marred, were no tribute paid at this time to the Hands of the Cause of God. For they share the victory with their beloved commander, he who raised them up and appointed them. They kept the ship on its course and brought it safe to port. The Universal House of Justice, with pride and love, recalls on this supreme occasion its profound admiration for the heroic work which they have accomplished. We do not wish to dwell on the appalling dangers which faced the infant Cause when it was suddenly deprived of our beloved Shoghi Effendi, but rather to acknowledge with all the love and gratitude of our hearts the reality of the sacrifice, the labor, the self-discipline, the superb stewardship of the Hands of the Cause of God. We can think of no more fitting words to express our tribute to these dearly loved and valiant souls than to recall the words of Bahá’u’lláh Himself: "Light and glory, greeting and praise be upon the Hands of His Cause, through whom the light of fortitude hath shone forth and the truth hath been established that the authority to choose rests with God, the Powerful, the Mighty, the Unconstrained, through whom the oceans of bounty hath surged and the fragrance of the gracious favors of God, the Lord of mankind, hath been diffused."[6]

1.4 The members of the Universal House of Justice, all being in Haifa at the time of the election, were able to visit the Holy Shrines of Bahá’u’lláh, the Báb, and of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, where they prostrated themselves at the Sacred Thresholds and humbly sought strength and assistance in the mighty task before them. Later, in London, they have paid homage at the resting-place of Shoghi Effendi, the blessed and sacred bough of the Tree of Holiness.

1.5 As soon as the House of Justice is able to organize its work and deploy its forces, it will examine carefully all the conditions of the Cause of God, and communications will be made to the friends. At this time we call upon the believers everywhere to follow up vigorously the opportunities opened up by the World Crusade. Consolidation and deepening must go hand in hand with an eager extension of the teaching work so that the onward march of the Cause may continue unabated in preparation for future plans. Now that the attention of the public is becoming more and more drawn to the Cause of God, the friends must brace themselves and prepare their institutions to sustain the gaze of the world, whether it be friendly or hostile, eager or idle.

1.6 The Universal House of Justice greets you all lovingly and joyfully at this time, and asks you to pray fervently for its speedy development and the spiritual strengthening of its members.


/*chapter*/Message to National Conventions 1963

7 May 1963
To the annual National Conventions of the Bahá’í World

Beloved Friends,

2.1 The marvellous happenings which have transpired during and immediately after the twelve days of Riḍván attest the greatness of the Cause of God, and fill every Bahá’í heart to overflowing with joy and gratitude.[1] It was in obedience to the summons of the Lord of Hosts Himself that the elected representatives of the fifty-six national and regional communities of the Bahá’í world were called to elect, in the shadow of God's Holy Mountain and in the house of the Center of His Covenant, the members of the Universal House of Justice.[2] It was the Sign of God on Earth, the Dayspring of Divine Guidance, the Guardian of the Cause of God, who gathered more than six thousand Bahá’ís from all parts of the earth to the celebration of the Most Great Jubilee in London.


Events of Spiritual and Administrative Significance

2.2 The first of these historic occasions was marked by events of extreme spiritual and administrative significance at the World Center of the Faith. The daily visits of large groups of believers, of many varying backgrounds, to the sacred Shrines in the twin holy Cities;[3] the holding of the First International Bahá’í Convention and the successful accomplishment of its main task; the celebration of the Riḍván Feast by some three hundred believers in the company of the Hands of the Cause of God in the precincts of the Ḥaram-i-Aqdas,[4] are events of unique character and untold significance in the history of our beloved Faith.

2.3 The celebration of the Most Great Jubilee in London must be described elsewhere. Suffice it to say now that this greatest gathering of Bahá’ís ever held in one place was permeated by a spirit of such bliss as could only have come from the outpourings of the Abhá Kingdom. The review of the progress of the Cause, the presentation of believers from the new races and countries of the world brought within the pale of the Faith during the Beloved Guardian's Ten Year Crusade, of the Knights of Bahá’u’lláh, those valiant souls who carried the banner of Bahá’u’lláh to the unopened and often inhospitable regions of the earth, the spontaneous outbursts of singing of "Alláh-u-Abhá," the informal gatherings, the constant greetings of Bahá’u’lláh's warriors known to each other only by name and service, the youth gatherings, the unprecedented publicity in the press, on radio and television, the daily stream of visitors to the beloved Guardian's resting-place, the radiant faces and heightened awareness of the true and real brotherhood of the human race within the Kingdom of the Everlasting Father, are among the outstanding events of this supreme occasion, the crowning victory of the lifework of Shoghi Effendi.


Reaffirmation of Tribute to the Hands of the Cause of God

2.4 The Universal House of Justice wishes to reaffirm at this time the tribute which it felt moved to pay to the Hands of the Cause of God at the World Congress, those precious souls who have brought the Cause safely to victory in the name of Shoghi Effendi. We wish also to remember the devoted work of their Auxiliary Board members, as well as the services of the Knights of Bahá’u’lláh, of the army of pioneers, the members of the National and Regional Spiritual Assemblies, the services and prayers and sacrifices of the believers everywhere, all of which in the sum total have attracted such bounties and favours from Bahá’u’lláh.

2.5 The Universal House of Justice, in several sessions held in the Holy Land and in London, has been able to initiate its work and to make arrangements for the establishment of the Institution in Haifa. It has no officers, and henceforth its communications to the Bahá’í World will be signed Universal House of Justice over an embossed seal.


Second Epoch of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Divine Plan

2.6 The Cause of God, launched on the sea of the Divine Plan of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, has achieved, under the superb leadership of its beloved Guardian, a spread throughout the world and a momentum which must now carry it forward on the next stage of its world- redeeming mission, the second epoch of the Divine Plan.[5] The Universal House of Justice, in close consultation with the Hands of the Cause, is examining the vast range of Bahá’í activity and growth in order to prepare a detailed plan of expansion for the whole Bahá’í community, to be launched at Riḍván 1964. But there are some objectives to be achieved at once.


Immediate objectives

2.7 The consolidation of the goals and new communities of the Bahá’í world is an urgent and immediate task facing the fifty-six National Spiritual Assemblies, and an essential preparation for the launching of the new plans. Pioneers must be maintained at their posts and all the Local Spiritual Assemblies strengthened through a firm establishment of Bahá’í community life and an active teaching programme. Those National Spiritual Assemblies which rest on the basis of a small number of Local Spiritual Assemblies must make great efforts to insure that this number will be increased at Riḍván 1964. Pioneers ready to go to consolidation areas, as well as those eager to open new territories, should make their offers through their National Spiritual Assembly.

2.8 The great work of teaching must be extended, not only in those areas where mass conversion is beginning, but everywhere. The high intensity of teaching activity reached at the end of the World Crusade, far from slackening, must now be increased as the friends everywhere draw on the vast spiritual powers released as a result of the celebration of the Most Great Jubilee and the emergence of the Universal House of Justice.

2.9 The Ten Year Crusade witnessed the completion of the structure of the Mother Temple of Europe.[6] It is now imperative to complete, without delay, the interior decoration, to install utilities and lay access roads, to landscape grounds and to construct the caretaker's house. This work will cost not less than $210,000.00, but if delayed it will cost considerably more. The House of Justice calls upon the National Spiritual Assemblies to allocate substantial budgets for the immediate completion of this work.


Preview of the new plan

2.10 The plan to be embarked upon next Riḍván,[7] the details of which will be announced during the coming year, will include such projects as the extension and embellishment of the endowments at the World Center; collation of the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi; continual reinforcement of the ties binding the Bahá’í World to the United Nations;[8] formation of many more National Spiritual Assemblies, both by division of existing Regional Spiritual Assemblies and the development of new Bahá’í communities, together with the purchase of national Ḥaẓíratu’l-Quds, Temple sites and national endowments; the opening of new territories to the Faith; detailed plans for National Spiritual Assemblies involving, in some areas, consolidation goals, in others the multiplication of Bahá’í institutes and schools, in others a great enrichment of Bahá’í literature, and in all a vast increase in the number of Bahá’ís, and the holding of oceanic and intercontinental conferences.

2.11 All such expansion and development of the Faith will be dependent upon the Bahá’í Fund. The Universal House of Justice calls the attention of every believer to this vital and pressing matter, and asks the National Spiritual Assemblies to pay special attention to the principle of universal participation, so that every single follower of Bahá’u’lláh may make his offering, however small or great, and thereby identify himself with the work of the Cause everywhere. It is our hope that a constant flow of contributions to the International Fund will make it possible to build up sufficient reserves for the launching of the new plan in 1964.

2.12 Beloved friends, we enter the second epoch of the Divine Plan blessed beyond compare, riding the crest of a great wave of victory produced for us by our beloved Guardian. The Cause of God is now firmly rooted in the world. Forward then, confident in the power and protection of the Lord of Hosts, who will, through storm and trial, toil and jubilee, use His devoted followers to bring to a despairing humanity, the life-giving waters of His supreme Revelation.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Seat of the Universal House of Justice; New Arrangements for Pilgrims
16 June 1963

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Friends,

3.1 The Universal House of Justice has been deeply moved and its hopes have been raised high by the many messages of love, devotion and eager anticipation which have been received from National Conventions and National Spiritual Assemblies.

3.2 Two decisions have been taken by the Universal House of Justice involving a further development of the institutions at the World Center. The former offices of the International Bahá’í Council at 10 Haparsim Street being inadequate for the far greater volume of work facing the Universal House of Justice, it has been decided to take over the whole of this building (until now called the Western Pilgrim House) as the seat, for the present time, of the Universal House of Justice.[1]

3.3 This decision made it necessary to find other accommodation for the western pilgrims and led directly to the second decision. After careful consideration of the alternatives the House of Justice has decided that the time has come to take the significant step, anticipated by our beloved Guardian, of housing all pilgrims in one place.[2] It was found possible, by slight alterations, to accommodate all pilgrims, without lessening the number, in the former Eastern Pilgrim House and its adjacent buildings. We have therefore established one Pilgrim House, at the Bahá’í Gardens on Mount Carmel. The friends should note that this is where they should go on arrival.

3.4 All friends whose pilgrimages have been confirmed for 1963-64 are therefore expected. There are still vacancies after December 1963, but only a very few before that date.

3.5 We have asked the Hands of the Cause residing in the Holy Land to continue to be responsible for the programme of the pilgrims while they are here, but letters requesting permission to come should be addressed to the Universal House of Justice.

With loving greetings,

In His Service,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Destruction of the ‘Ishqábád Temple
25 August 1963

To the National Spiritual Assemblies of the Bahá’í World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

4.1 The whole Bahá’í World will be grief-stricken at the news of the sad fate which has overtaken the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár in ‘Ishqábád, the first Temple raised to the glory of Bahá’u’lláh.[1] Due to its unsafe condition, resulting from earthquakes, the building has been entirely demolished and the site cleared.

4.2 The building of this edifice, the only structure of its kind to be raised and completed in the lifetime of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, was described by the beloved Guardian as "a lasting witness to the fervour and the self-sacrifice of the Oriental believers." This "enterprise," the Guardian further wrote, "must rank not only as the first major undertaking launched through the concerted efforts of His followers in the Heroic Age of His Faith, but as one of the most brilliant and enduring achievements in the history of the first Bahá’í century."[2]

4.3 The Bahá’í center in ‘Ishqábád was founded in the days of Bahá’u’lláh. Already during His lifetime preliminary steps had been adopted by the friends of that community to build, in accordance with the provisions of the Most Holy Book, a Mashriqu’l-Adhkár.[3]

4.4 However, the project had to be postponed until 1902, at the end of the first decade of the Ministry of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, when He initiated its construction, called on the friends in the East to offer their contributions towards the fulfilment of this goal, and personally encouraged and directed its development at every stage. The Báb's cousin, the venerable Ḥájí Mírzá Muḥammad-Taqí, the Vakílu’d-Dawlih, offered his total wealth towards this meritorious enterprise, established his residence in that city, and personally supervised its construction.

4.5 The laying of the cornerstone of this edifice at a ceremony attended by the delegate of the Czar -- the Governor-general of Turkistan -- and the initial steps taken to raise this first House of Worship of the Bahá’í World, inspired the friends in America, who, in 1903, eager to demonstrate the quality of their faith, petitioned ‘Abdu’l-Bahá for permission to erect the first Mashriqu’l-Adhkár of the West.

4.6 In addition to the Temple itself, two schools, one for boys and one for girls, and a pilgrim house were built. The local community, and the activities of the friends throughout the provinces of Turkistan expanded and developed in stature until 1928, when the law expropriating religious edifices was applied to this Temple. However, under the terms of two five-year leases, the Bahá’í community was permitted to continue to use the building as a house of worship. In 1938 the Temple was completely expropriated and converted into an art gallery.

4.7 In 1948 violent earthquakes shook the whole town causing devastation and ruin. The building was seriously damaged. The only section which remained relatively secure was the central rotunda. Heavy yearly rains further weakened the structure to such a degree as to endanger the safety of houses in the vicinity. It was at this point that the authorities decided to demolish the remaining edifice and clear the site.

4.8 A reliable report, recently received, indicates that had the Temple been restored to us at this point, we should have had no option but to raze the building ourselves.

4.9 Please share this news with the friends but we do not wish National Assemblies, Local Assemblies or individual believers to take any action.

With loving greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/The Guardianship
6 October 1963

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Beloved Friends,

5.1 We wish to share with you the text of the following resolution:

After prayerful and careful study of the Holy Texts bearing upon the question of the appointment of the successor to Shoghi Effendi as Guardian of the Cause of God, and after prolonged consultation which included consideration of the views of the Hands of the Cause of God residing in the Holy Land, the Universal House of Justice finds that there is no way to appoint or to legislate to make it possible to appoint a second Guardian to succeed Shoghi Effendi.
5.2 Please share this message with the friends in your jurisdiction.

With loving greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Announcement of the Nine Year Plan
October 1963

To the Followers of Bahá’u’lláh throughout the World

Fellow believers in the Cause of God,

6.1 Six years ago when nearing the midway point of the Ten Year Crusade, the Bahá’í World found itself abruptly deprived of the guiding hand of its beloved Guardian. The anguish which then seized our hearts, far from paralyzing the progress of the Cause, stiffened our resolve and fired our zeal to complete the tasks which God, through His Chosen Branch, had laid upon us.[1] The august institution of the Hands of the Cause of God which he had, but recently, in compliance with the instructions of the Master's Will, raised up, kept the people of this Cause faithfully to the path which had been shown to us by the pen of divine guidance, and brought us not only to the triumphal conclusion of that Crusade but to the culminating point of the construction of the framework of Bahá’u’lláh's World Order.[2]

6.2 In March 1930 Shoghi Effendi wrote that Bahá’u’lláh and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá had "in unequivocal and emphatic language, appointed those twin institutions of the House of Justice and of the Guardianship as their chosen Successors, destined to apply the principles, promulgate the laws, protect the institutions, adapt loyally and intelligently the Faith to the requirements of progressive society, and consummate the incorruptible inheritance which the Founders of the Faith have bequeathed to the world." After long and prayerful consultation, the House of Justice, as the friends have already been informed, found that there is no way in which it can legislate for a second Guardian to succeed Shoghi Effendi.[3] The Universal House of Justice has therefore begun, in humble obedience to the Will of God, and strengthened by daily prayer in the Holy Shrines, to undertake the heavy tasks laid upon it. In the words of our beloved Guardian it "Will guide, organize and unify the affairs of the Movement throughout the world" and "will have to consider afresh the whole situation, and lay down the principle which shall direct, so long as it deems advisable, the affairs of the Cause."[4]


The Covenant of Bahá’u’lláh

6.3 The Covenant of Bahá’u’lláh is unbroken, its all-encompassing power inviolate. The two unique features which distinguish it from all religious covenants of the past are unchanged and operative. The revealed Word, in its original purity, amplified by the divinely guided interpretations of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi, remains immutable, unadulterated by any man-made creeds or dogmas, unwarrantable inferences or unauthorized interpretations. The channel of divine guidance, providing flexibility in all the affairs of mankind, remains open through that Institution which was founded by Bahá’u’lláh and endowed by Him with supreme authority and unfailing guidance, and of which the Master wrote: "Unto this body all things must be referred."[5] How clearly we can see the truth of Bahá’u’lláh's assertion: "The Hand of Omnipotence hath established His Revelation upon an unassailable, an enduring foundation. Storms of human strife are powerless to undermine its basis, nor will men's fanciful theories succeed in damaging its structure.[6]


Responsibility of the Institutions

6.4 As the significance of the Cause of God continues in the years ahead to become more clearly apparent to the eyes of men, a great responsibility to watch over its security rests upon all of its institutions. The Institution of the Hands of the Cause of God, charged in the sacred Texts with the specific duties of protecting and propagating the Faith, has a particularly vital responsibility to discharge. In their capacity as protectors of the Faith, the Hands will continue to take action to expel Covenant-breakers and to reinstate those who sincerely repent, subject in each instance to the approval of the Universal House of Justice.[7] Exercising their function of propagating the Faith, the Hands of the Cause will inspire, advise and assist the National Spiritual Assemblies in the work as they did in the time of our beloved Shoghi Effendi, assisted by the members of their Auxiliary Boards who will continue to fulfill those functions outlined for them by him.

6.5 We stand now upon the threshold of the second epoch of Abdu'l-Baha's Divine Plan, with the outposts of the Cause established in the remotest corners of the earth, and having already witnessed the beginnings of that entry into the Faith by troops promised by the Master Himself. The foundation of the Kingdom has been securely laid, the framework has been raised. The friends must now consolidate these achievements, safeguard their institutions and gather the peoples and kindreds of the world into the Ark which the Hand of God has built.


Second Global Plan

6.6 Next Riḍván will be launched the second of those world-encircling enterprises destined in the course of time to carry the Word of God to every human soul. The standard-bearers of this Nine Year Plan are the Hands of the Cause of God. The responsibility for directing the work will rest upon the shoulders of the National Spiritual Assemblies, the generals of the Army of Light, under the guidance of the Universal House of Justice.

6.7 As the first step inaugurating this great undertaking we rejoice to announce the formation next Riḍván of nineteen National Spiritual Assemblies, resulting in the dissolution of six of the existing Regional National Spiritual Assemblies, and bringing the total number of these pillars of the Universal House of Justice to sixty-nine. The National and Regional National Assemblies now to be formed are:

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of North West Africa, with its seat in Tunis, comprising Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Spanish Sahara, Rio de Oro, Mauritania, the Canary Is., and Madeira.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of West Africa, with its seat in Monrovia, comprising Liberia, Sénégal, Gambia, Portuguese Guinea, Guinée, Sierra Leone, Mali, Upper Volta, Ivory Coast and Cape Verde Is.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of West Central Africa, with its seat in Victoria, comprising Cameroon, Spanish Guinea, St. Thomas I., Fernando Po I., Corisco L, Nigeria, Niger, Dahomey, Togo, and Ghana.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Uganda and Central Africa, with its seat in Kampala, comprising Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, the Republic of the Congo (Ex-Belgian), the Congo Republic (Ex-French), Central African Republic, Gabon and Chad.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Kenya, with its seat in Nairobi '
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Tanganyika and Zanzibar, with its seat in Dar-es-Salaam, comprising Tanganyika, Zanzibar, Mafia I., and Pemba I.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of South Central Africa, with its seat in Salisbury, comprising Nyasaland, Northern Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesia and Bechuanaland.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of South and West Africa, with its seat in Johannesburg, comprising Angola, Southwest Africa, South Africa, Zululand, Swaziland, Basutoland, Mozambique and St. Helena.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the Indian Ocean, with its seat in Port Louis, comprising Mauritius, the Malagasy Republic, Réunion I., Seychelles Is., Comoro Is., and the Chagos Archipelago.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the Hawaiian Islands, with its seat in Honolulu.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the South Pacific Ocean, with its seat in Suva, comprising the Gilbert and Ellice Is., Nauru I., Fiji, Samoa Is., Tonga Is., and Cook Is.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the South West Pacific Ocean, with its seat in Honiara, comprising the Solomon Is., New Hebrides Is., New Caledonia and Loyalty Is.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of North East Asia, with its seat in Tokyo, comprising Japan, Formosa, Hong Kong and Macau.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Korea, with its seat in Seoul.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Malaysia, with its seat in Kuala Lumpur, comprising Malaya, Singapore, Brunei, Sabah and Sarawak.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Indonesia, with its seat in Djakarta, comprising Indonesia, the Mentawai Is., Portuguese Timor and West Iran.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Vietnam, with its seat in Saigon, and having jurisdiction over the Bahá’í's of Cambodia.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Thailand, with its seat in Bangkok, and having jurisdiction over the Bahá’ís of Laos.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the Philippines, with its seat in Manila.
6.8 The detailed goals of the Plan, which will include sixty-nine national plans, have yet to be announced, but they must be such as to develop still further the World Center of the Faith and the work of its institutions; to consolidate those territories which have already been opened to the Faith; to bring God's heating Message to many more of the peoples and territories of the world including all the unopened territories of the Ten Year Crusade and all the remaining independent states of the planet; and to achieve worldwide proclamation of the Faith to mark the Centenary of Bahá’u’lláh's Proclamation to the kings and rulers in 1867-1868.[8]

6.9 In the spring of 1968 the next election for the Universal House of Justice will take place.


Third Epoch of the Formative Age

6.10 Beloved friends, the Cause of God, guarded and nurtured since its inception by God's Messengers, by the Center of His Covenant and by His Sign on earth, now enters a new epoch, the third of the Formative Age.[9] It must now grow rapidly in size, increase its spiritual cohesion and executive ability, develop its institutions and extend its influence into all strata of society. We, its members, must, by constant study of the life-giving Word, and by dedicated service, deepen in spiritual understanding and show to the world a mature, responsible, fundamentally assured and happy way of life, far removed from the passions, prejudices and distractions of present day society. Relying upon God alone, we can promote His Cause and establish His Kingdom on earth. Only thus can we prove our love for Those Who brought this new day into being. Only thus can we prove the truth of Their Divine Mission and demonstrate how valid was Their Sacrifice.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Request for Prayers for Moroccan Bahá’í Prisoners
17 October 1963

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Friends,

7.1 Our Bahá’í friends who were tried at Nador, Morocco, last year and who received sentences of death or life imprisonment are still being held in prison.[1] Their appeal which has been pending for nearly a year still has not been heard. However, we are pleased to report that another Bahá’í prisoner, Mohammad Manaan, of Tangier was recently provisionally released.

7.2 We are calling for believers throughout the world to pray at the Feast Of Qawl (November 23rd) that early favorable action may be taken in the cases of these devoted and steadfast friends whose long suffering on behalf of our Faith has been an inspiration to Bahá’ís everywhere.

7.3 The friends at the World Center will join you on that day by saying prayers at the Holy Shrines for our Moroccan friends.

With loving greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Report on Moroccan Bahá’í Prisoners
15 November 1963

To the National Spiritual Assemblies of the British Isles, France, and the United States

Dear Friends,

8.1 The case of the Bahá’í prisoners in Morocco has passed through three stages:

(a) The arrest, detention and trial which began in April, 1962 and ended on December 15, 1962 when they appeared in court and received their respective sentences.
(b) The second stage began when the verdict was known and widely publicized, attracting the attention of many influential people both within and without Morocco resulting in widespread sympathy on behalf of the prisoners and many petitions to the Moroccan government.
(c) The third stage has been characterized by relative quiet and lack of publicity while all are waiting for the appeal to be heard. We are now in this stage, the most difficult of all.
8.2 The Universal House of Justice wishes to share with you a summary of the present situation as it appears from reports received from many sources, and to outline the policies which it believes should govern our immediate actions.

8.3 The prisoners, except for one who will be referred to later, are still in prison awaiting their unknown fate with great firmness and patience. For more than a year and a half they have withstood all manner of harassment and difficulty. We are informed that the three sentenced to death have been kept in solitary confinement for twenty-three hours of every day. Because of recent political developments it has become more and more difficult for Bahá’í friends to meet these dear souls in prison, but when it has been possible the Bahá’ís and non-believers alike are astonished that the prisoners are able to demonstrate such exemplary steadfastness and patience.

8.4 It is still not known when the appeal will be heard. At first it was promised that it would be among the first cases taken up after the courts reconvened in October. Again, some felt that it would be delayed until the opening of parliament in November. Now it is thought that the appeal will be heard very soon because it has been presented to the Court in such a way that they cannot delay it longer than one month. A favorable result is also anticipated.

8.5 The prisoner in Tangier, Mr. Ma’anan, has been provisionally released. His release followed a finding by the magistrate of that city that he could not find any convincing evidence in the file proving the charges regarding political subversion and incitement against Islam were justified. In the view of the magistrate the prisoner is guilty of no other crime than that of being a Bahá’í. Nevertheless, the prosecution appealed from this finding, and it was only after later efforts on the part of the legal committee in Morocco that Mr. Ma’anan was released.

8.6 Recently there has been a proposal for a change in the law which would provide a penalty of up to three years in prison for persons who are convicted of enticing Muslims to change their faith.

8.7 While this law cannot be applied retroactively to the Bahá’í prisoners, it is felt that this change in the law together with the result in the Tangier case will have a favorable effect on the other cases since it indicated the injustice of the convictions and the harshness of the penalties meted out. We have had many excellent suggestions from all of you as to courses of action which might be taken to secure the release of our fellow Bahá’ís. All have been carefully considered and weighed together in arriving at our present course of action. . . .

8.8 If the appeal should be further delayed, we must reconsider our present policy and do whatever is reasonably required to bring about an early hearing of the appeal. In the meantime the entire Bahá’í world is offering prayers on behalf of the prisoners at the Feast of Qawl.

8.9 This letter is for your own information and is not to be circulated.

8.10 With grateful appreciation and with warm Bahá’í love and greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Development of National Bahá’í Funds
15 November 1963

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Friends,

9.1 While it is understood that many communities do not have the resources to fully sustain their administrative and teaching work, it is important that each National Assembly make every effort to work out a programme and budget which will enable it to become self-sustaining as rapidly as possible.

9.2 To accomplish this, the friends should be made to appreciate the bounties which come from regular and systematic contribution to the National Fund. The amount of the contribution is not as important as universal participation. In a letter to the National Spiritual Assembly of Central and East Africa dated 8 August 1957 the beloved Guardian said:

9.2a The institution of the National Fund, so vital and essential for the uninterrupted progress of these activities must, in particular, be assured of the wholehearted the ever-increasing and universal support of the mass of believers, for whose welfare, and in whose name, these beneficent activities have been initiated and have been conducted. All, no matter how modest their resources, must participate. . . .
9.3 National Assemblies needing supplemental assistance for budgets after Riḍván, 1964 should direct their appeal to the Universal House of Justice. They should not appeal to another National Assembly except in specific cases authorized by the Universal House of Justice.

9.4 We shall pray that the bounties of the Almighty will descend upon the growing Administrative Order of His promised Kingdom on Earth so that we may be enabled to take His healing message to all peoples everywhere.

With loving greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Relationship of Hands of the Cause of God and National Spiritual Assemblies
19 November 1963

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Friends,

10.1 The relationship of the Continental Hands[1] and their respective National Assemblies was clearly delineated in the Message of the beloved Guardian dated 4 June 1957:

10.1a CALL UPON HANDS NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES EACH CONTINENT SEPARATELY ESTABLISH HENCEFORTH DIRECT CONTACT DELIBERATE WHENEVER FEASIBLE AS FREQUENTLY POSSIBLE EXCHANGE REPORTS TO BE SUBMITTED THEIR RESPECTIVE AUXILIARY BOARDS NATIONAL COMMITTEES EXERCISE UNRELAXING VIGILANCE CARRY OUT UNFLINCHINGLY SACRED INESCAPABLE DUTIES. SECURITY PRECIOUS FAITH PRESERVATION SPIRITUAL HEALTH BAHÁ’Í COMMUNITIES VITALITY FAITH ITS INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS PROPER FUNCTIONING ITS LABORIOUSLY ERECTED INSTITUTIONS FRUITION ITS WORLD-WIDE ENTERPRISES FULFILMENT ITS ULTIMATE DESTINY ALL DIRECTLY DEPENDENT BEFITTING DISCHARGE [Page 23]WEIGHTY RESPONSIBILITIES NOW RESTING MEMBERS THESE TWO INSTITUTIONS OCCUPYING WITH UNIVERSAL HOUSE JUSTICE NEXT INSTITUTION GUARDIANSHIP FOREMOST RANK, DIVINELY ORDAINED ADMINISTRATIVE HIERARCHY WORLD ORDER BAHÁ’U’LLÁH.
10.2 These highly significant words of the beloved Guardian clearly foreshadow the tremendous importance of the joint responsibility which he placed upon the Hands and the National Assemblies in protecting the believers and fostering the world-wide development of the Faith.

10.3 We stress the necessity of doing everything possible to expedite and facilitate this free play of consultation between the Hands and the National Assemblies within the spirit and framework of these instructions of Shoghi Effendi. The two institutions have joint and complementary functions which can be discharged successfully only if the greatest degree of understanding and co-operation exists between them.

10.4 We are confident that this relationship will be further strengthened and developed in the manner envisioned by the Guardian, and that it will contribute in large measure to the successful achievement of the goals of the Nine Year Plan which is to be inaugurated this coming Riḍván.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Auxiliary Board members on National Spiritual Assemblies
25 November 1963

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Beloved Friends,

11.1 The Hands of the Cause at their London Conclave last May decided that Auxiliary Board members should be free of administrative responsibilities in order to devote their full energies to their work as Board members.[1] Those Board members serving on National Assemblies were therefore requested to decide, before Riḍván 1964, in which capacity they could best serve the Cause.

11.2 In view of this request made by the Hands of the Cause to their Auxiliary Board members, the Universal House of Justice has reached the following decisions:

11.2a 1. National Assemblies in whose areas of jurisdiction Board members reside, should point out to the delegates at Convention that whilst teaching and administrative duties are not mutually exclusive, it is desirable that Auxiliary Board members, whether for teaching or protection, be left free to concentrate on the work allotted to them by the Hands of the Cause in each Continent. The following extract from the Guardian's letter, written through his secretary, could be shared with the delegates for their guidance when casting their votes:
11.2b "The teachers of the Cause can surely become members of any Assembly or committee. There should be no incapacity attached to them. But Shoghi Effendi would just prefer to see them devote all their time to teaching and leave the administrative functions for those who cannot serve as teachers." (Bahá’í News, October 1932)
11.2c 2. Should Board members still be elected on National Assemblies after the above explanation, it should rest with each Board member to decide [Page 25]which of the two functions he feels best suited to perform. The Universal House of Justice, therefore, approves the request made by the Hands of the Cause to their Board members that they choose between the two functions.
11.2d 3. In the event of the resignation of Auxiliary Board members from National Assemblies, this should be considered as good reason for resignation. If, however, the National Assembly, in view of special conditions, should consider such resignations to be detrimental to the interests of the Faith of that National Community, and the Board member should insist upon resigning on the grounds of his membership on the Board, the matter should be at once referred to the Universal House of Justice by the National Spiritual Assembly for examination and final decision. Pending such a decision, the Board member should continue his membership on the National Assembly, and explain his position to the Hands of the Cause in his continent.
11.2e 4. Measures will have to be taken by National Assemblies according to normal procedure to fill any vacancies created in this way. If the vacancy is recognized while Convention is still in session, a by-election could be arranged before Convention disbands.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Release of Moroccan Bahá’í prisoners
18 December 1963

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Friends,

12.1 Following twenty months of close confinement, and one year after hearing sentences of death and imprisonment imposed on them, our brave and steadfast brother believers in Morocco were set free on Friday, 13 December 1963. The long-sought objective has been obtained.

12.2 As we prayed for their release during the Feast of Qawl, now let the entire Bahá’í world join in prayers of thanksgiving for this joyful outcome and that the Blessed Beauty enabled these devoted friends to remain firm in their faith through this trying ordeal.[1]

12.3 [Page 26]In view of the situation which continues to be delicate in Morocco, you are urged not to seek publicity in this matter. If you are contacted by the press, make no statement beyond expressing thankfulness for the just decision.

12.4 Each National Assembly is requested, wherever possible, to express gratification to King Hassan II of Morocco for this just decision of the Supreme Court. This should be done in writing through the Moroccan Embassy, or Consulate, serving your area.

12.5 We also request that wherever you consider it advisable you write letters of appreciation to individuals and organizations within your jurisdiction who offered assistance in connection with this case.

With warm and loving Bahá’í greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/The Bahá’í Funds
18 December 1963

To the Bahá’ís of East and West

Dear Friends,

13.1 With the rapid approach of the launching of the Nine Year Plan, the Universal House of Justice feels that it is timely to lay clearly before the Bahá’ís of all countries, the needs of the Fund at all its levels: local, national, continental and international.

13.2 The continual expansion of the Faith and the diversification of the activities of Bahá’í communities make it more and more necessary for every believer to ponder carefully his responsibilities and contribute as much and as regularly as he or she can. Contributing to the Fund is a service that every believer can render, be he poor or wealthy; for this is a spiritual responsibility in which the amount given is not important. It is the degree of the sacrifice of the giver, the love with which he makes his gift, and the unity of all the friends in this service which bring spiritual confirmations. As the beloved Guardian wrote in August 1957: "All, no matter how modest their resources, must participate. Upon the degree of self-sacrifice involved in these individual contributions will directly depend the efficacy and the spiritual influence which these nascent administrative institutions, called into being through the power of Bahá’u’lláh, and by virtue of the Design conceived by the Center of His Covenant, will exert."[1]

13.3 [Page 27]Not only the individual's responsibility to contribute is important at this time, but also the uses to which the fund is put and the areas in which it is expended.

13.4 Much of the present rapid expansion of the Faith is taking place in areas of great poverty where the believers, however much they sacrifice, cannot produce sufficient funds to sustain the work. It is these very areas which are the most fruitful in teaching, and a sum of money spent here will produce ten times―even a hundred times―the results obtainable in other parts of the world. Yet in the past months the Universal House of Justice has had to refuse a number of appeals for assistance from such areas because there just was not enough money in the International Fund.

13.5 It should therefore be the aim of every local and national community to become not only self-supporting, but to expend its funds with such wisdom and economy as to be able to contribute substantially to the Bahá’í International Fund, thus enabling the House of Justice to aid the work in fruitful but impoverished areas, to assist new National Assemblies to start their work, to contribute to major international undertakings of the Nine Year Plan such as Oceanic Conferences, and to carry forward the work of beautifying the land surrounding the Holy Shrines at the World Center of the Faith.

13.6 Nor should the believers, individually or in their Assemblies, forget the vitally important Continental Funds which provide for the work of the Hands of the Cause of God and their Auxiliary Boards. This divine institution, so assiduously fostered by the Guardian, and which has already played a unique role in the history of the Faith, is destined to render increasingly important services in the years to come.

13.7 In the midst of a civilization torn by strifes and enfeebled by materialism, the people of Bahá are building a new world. We face at this time opportunities and responsibilities of vast magnitude and great urgency. Let each believer in his inmost heart resolve not to be seduced by the ephemeral allurements of the society around him, nor to be drawn into its feuds and short-lived enthusiasms, but instead to transfer all he can from the old world to that new one which is the vision of his longing and will be the fruit of his labours.

With loving greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


1964-1973 - The Nine Year Plan
/*chapter*/Convention greetings 1964
19 April 1964

To the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the United States

15.1 OCCASION RIḌVÁN FESTIVAL EXTEND LOVING GREETINGS HANDS DELEGATES FRIENDS PRESENT HISTORIC CONVENTIONS LAUNCHING FIRST ENTERPRISE SECOND EPOCH UNFOLDMENT ‘ABDU’L-BAHÁ'S DIVINE PLAN. HAIL FORMATION THIRTEEN ADDITIONAL NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES TESTIFYING RESISTLESS DEVELOPMENT WORLD ORDER BAHÁ’U’LLÁH. CONVEY ALL FRIENDS JOYFUL NEWS DEDICATION MOTHER TEMPLE EUROPE JULY FOURTH. ASSURE ARDENT PRAYERS VICTORIES BOUNTIFUL FAVOURS COURSE PLAN NOW LAUNCHED.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Guidelines for the Nine Year Plan
14 May 1964

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Friends,

16.1 We have been receiving with deep joy and gratification, reports of the Conventions held throughout the Bahá’í world during the Riḍván period just concluded and the national and regional elections resulting in the formation of sixty-nine National Spiritual Assemblies.

16.2 The announcement of the goals of the Nine Year Plan has received universally a warm response. Individuals, Conventions and Assemblies have pledged loyalty and given assurance of the execution of the assigned goals with determination and dedication. In two cases a goal has already been declared accomplished.

16.3 If your Assembly has been given what appears to be a heavy task, particularly in terms of home-front goals, you should consider how this can be phased so that your teaching program is conducted systematically. When you do work out such an internal plan we would appreciate receiving a copy.

16.4 We feet that at this time certain guidelines could be given to the National Spiritual Assemblies to assist them in the understanding and attainment of the goals assigned to them.

16.5 New and Unsettled Territories: this aspect of the Plan is of vital importance. It involves the establishment of points of light in new territories, the further diffusion of the radiance of the Faith of God and is directly linked with the prestige and international status of the Faith. It is essential that the enthusiasm generated at the Conventions be capitalized upon and the pioneers who have offered their services are directed wisely and energetically to the posts to be opened and resettled.

16.6 Acquisition of Properties: as prices generally are soaring everywhere it is important that properties called for in the Plan be purchased as soon as funds are made available. Your National Assembly is no doubt conscious of the fact that wherever a Ḥaẓíratu’l-Quds has been allocated it should be a modest structure, acquired in a dignified location within the civil limits of the town or city named in the Plan. However, a Temple site could be near the city, as it is not essential that it be located within the civil limits of the city.

16.7 National Endowments: the object here is not to buy an extensive property. A token piece of land, possibly donated by a believer, is all that is required for the moment.

16.8 Teaching Institute: this is essentially an activity aimed at deepening the knowledge of the friends to prepare them for active participation in the teaching work. In some countries it may continue to be an activity conducted either in local Bahá’í Centers or possibly housed in hired quarters, like most Summer Schools. However, in other countries, and particularly in mass teaching areas, it may have to be a modest structure acquired or erected in the rural areas where the majority of the believers reside rather than in capital cities, to obviate transportation expenses for those attending.

16.9 Recognition of the Faith: such goals as national and local incorporations, as well as applications to obtain recognition of the Bahá’í Marriage Certificate and Bahá’í Holy Days, should be embarked upon only when circumstances are propitious and there is reasonable assurance that the goal can be attained.

16.10 New Languages: the translation of Bahá’í literature into new languages should be carefully coordinated with the settlement of pioneers in areas using such languages. Therefore, this is a goal which must be pursued vigorously and without delay so that the teaching work may proceed effectively in these areas.

16.11 If in the pursuit of any of the above or other goals your Assembly should experience any difficulty or need any clarification, you are welcome to write to us at once.

16.12 We assure you of our constant prayers at the Holy Shrines for the befitting discharge of your responsibilities under the Nine Year Plan.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Dedication of the Mother Temple of Europe, Langenhain, Germany
July 1964

To the beloved of God gathered in the European Teaching Conference called on the occasion of the dedication of the Mother Temple of Europe

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

17.1 We have just witnessed the dedication of the Mother Temple of Europe―a project of untold significance and tremendous potential for the spread of the light of God's Faith in that Continent. One of the major achievements called for by our beloved Guardian at the outset of the Ten Year Crusade, this Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs was triumphantly raised during its closing years as the fruit of long and arduous labours in the face of determined opposition and upon the sacrificial gifts of believers from all parts of the world. Now dedicated in the opening months of the Nine Year Plan; it forms a striking link between these two great crusades, demonstrating afresh the organic progress of the Cause whereby the efforts exerted in one period bear fruit in the next, which in turn endow the Bahá’í Community with new and greater capacities for the winning of still greater victories.

17.2 You are now gathered in this Conference to deliberate on ways and means of accomplishing the goals which are set before you. Let every believer, as he considers in detail these various goals, bear in mind four supreme objectives: to carry the Message of Bahá’u’lláh to every stratum of society, not only in the towns and cities but also in the villages and country districts where the virus of materialism has had much less effect on the lives of men; to take urgent, wise and well-considered steps to spread the Faith to those countries of Eastern Europe in which it has not yet become established; to reinforce strongly the heroic band of pioneers in the islands of the Mediterranean and the North Sea―islands which are to play such an important role in the awakening of the entire continent―as well as to prosecute energetically the goals you are called upon to achieve in other continents and oceans; and to foster the co-operation between National Communities and between National Spiritual Assemblies and the Hands of the Cause of God which has contributed so markedly to the work of the Faith on that Continent and is so essential for its future development.

17.3 Above all let every European Bahá’í have ever-present in his mind that these are the five years during which Bahá’u’lláh sojourned on the soil of that Continent a century ago.[1] Let him resolve so to deepen his knowledge of the Faith and so to increase his standards of self-sacrifice and dedication to the Cause as to play his part in building a Community which will be worthy of this supreme bounty and which will be a beacon light to the peoples of this fear-wracked world.

17.4 In 1953 Shoghi Effendi wrote that the Continent of Europe had "at last at this critical hour―this great turning point in its fortunes―entered upon what may well be regarded as the opening phase of a great spiritual revival that bids fair to eclipse any period in its spiritual history."[2] Those who have been privileged to witness the extraordinary strengthening and consolidation of the Cause in Europe during the course of the last eleven years are well aware of the reservoir of spiritual potential that has been building up and the transformation of the life of the European Bahá’í Community that has ensued. May the completion and dedication of the Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs be the signal for the unleashing of this potential, bringing about on the European mainland and in the islands around its shores a quickening of the process of individual conversion comparable to those events which have transpired with such astonishing suddenness in other continents of the globe.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Teaching the Masses
13 July 1964

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

18.1 When the masses of mankind are awakened and enter the Faith of God, a new process is set in motion and the growth of a new civilization begins. Witness the emergence of Christianity and of Islam. These masses are the rank and file, steeped in traditions of their own, but receptive to the new Word of God, by which, when they truly respond to it, they become so influenced as to transform those who come in contact with them.

18.2 God's standards are different from those of men. According to men's standards, the acceptance of any cause by people of distinction, of recognized fame and status, determines the value and greatness of that cause. But, in the words of Bahá’u’lláh: "The summons and the message which We gave were never intended to reach or to benefit one land or one people only. Mankind in its entirety must firmly adhere to whatsoever hath been revealed and vouchsafed unto it." Or again, "He hath endowed every soul with the capacity to recognize the signs of God. How could He, otherwise, have fulfilled His testimony unto men, if ye be of them that ponder His Cause in their hearts."[1] In countries where teaching the masses has succeeded, the Bahá’ís have poured out their time and effort in village areas to the same extent as they had formerly done in cities and towns. The results indicate how unwise it is to solely concentrate on one section of the population. Each National Assembly therefore should so balance its resources and harmonize its efforts that the Faith of God is taught not only to those who are readily accessible but to all sections of society, however remote they may be.

18.3 The unsophisticated people of the world―and they form the large majority of its population―have the same right to know of the Cause of God as others. When the friends are teaching the Word of God they should be careful to give the Message in the same simplicity as it is enunciated in our Teachings. In their contacts they must show genuine and divine love. The heart of an unlettered soul is extremely sensitive; any trace of prejudice on the part of the pioneer or teacher is immediately sensed.

18.4 When teaching among the masses, the friends should be careful not to emphasize the charitable and humanitarian aspects of the Faith as a means to win recruits. Experience has shown that when facilities such as schools, dispensaries, hospitals, or even clothes and food are offered to the people being taught, many complications arise. The prime motive should always be the response of man to God's message, and the recognition of His Messenger. Those who declare themselves as Bahá’ís should become enchanted with the beauty of the Teachings; and touched by the love of Bahá’u’lláh. The declarants need not know all the proofs, history, laws, and principles of the Faith, but in the process of declaring themselves they must, in addition to catching the spark of faith, become basically informed about the Central Figures of the Faith, as well as the existence of laws they must follow and an administration they must obey.

18.5 After declaration, the new believers must not be left to their own devices. Through correspondence and dispatch of visitors, through conferences and training courses, these friends must be patiently strengthened and lovingly helped to develop into full Bahá’í maturity. The beloved Guardian referring to the duties of Bahá’í Assemblies in assisting the newly declared believer has written: ". . . the members of each and every Assembly should endeavour, by their patience, their love, their tact and wisdom, to nurse, subsequent to his admission, the newcomer into Bahá’í maturity, and win him over gradually to the unreserved acceptance of whatever has been ordained in the teachings."[2]


Expansion and consolidation―simultaneous processes

18.6 Expansion and consolidation are twin processes that must go hand in hand. The friends must not stop expansion in the name of consolidation. Deepening the newly enrolled believers generates tremendous stimulus which results in further expansion. The enrolment of new believers, on the other hand, creates a new spirit in the community and provides additional potential manpower that will reinforce the consolidation work.

18.7 We would like to share with you some of the methods used by National Assemblies in various continents that have proved useful in teaching the masses, and attach a list. Certain of these may be valuable in your area, in addition to any methods you may yourself devise.

18.8 We are fervently praying that all National and Local Spiritual Assemblies, supported by the individual believers, will achieve outstanding success in the fulfilment of this glorious objective.

18.9 Please share this communication with all the friends.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


Teaching the masses
Annex
18.10 1. Materials are sent at once to the new believers. In some places this material is in the form of printed cards, mainly in colour, portraying a Bahá’í theme or principle. This helps the new believer to know that his declaration has been accepted and to feel that he now belongs to the new Faith.

18.11 2. Training courses of about 2 weeks duration are held. To facilitate attendance and reduce cost, a number of villages are grouped together as one zone in which the course is held. The students to the courses are usually selected, so that the more capable participate, and teaching is facilitated. Transportation expenses, feeding and accommodation are provided, if it is found that the participants are unable to cover such expenses themselves. The material to be taught is prepared ahead of time, presented in simple language, and translated into the vernacular. After the course, the more promising students are picked out, and with their consent, are requested to undertake teaching projects for a limited period. It is sometimes found that long-term projects are also useful. These projects generally are carefully planned as to their duration, places to be visited, and material to be taught. If the travelling teachers are not able to cover their expenses, travelling and living expenses are provided by the Fund for the execution of a given and temporary teaching project.

18.12 3. Shorter training courses in the form of conferences over a long weekend are held.

18.13 4. These activities―training courses and conferences―are repeated as frequently as possible and are not dependent upon the acquisition of Teaching Institutes. In the absence of such Institutes, these courses and conferences are normally held in Bahá’í homes or hired quarters, such as schools, etc. In order to facilitate the physical catering and accommodation of the participants they are sometimes asked to come to the course with their eating utensils and bedding.

18.14 5. In the visits made to the villages, the visiting teacher meets with the Local Communities to give them basic Bahá’í knowledge, such as living the Bahá’í life, the importance of teaching, prayer, fasting, Nineteen Day Feasts, Bahá’í elections, and contributions to the Fund. The question of contributions to the Fund is of utmost importance, so that the new believers may quickly feel themselves to be responsible members of the Community. Each National Assembly must find ways and means to stimulate the offering of contributions, in cash or kind, to make it easy for the friends to contribute and to give proper receipts to the donors.

18.15 These are but suggestions based on experience which may help you in your efforts to teach and deepen the spiritually starved multitudes in your area.

18.16 In the course of carrying out such a tremendous spiritual campaign among the masses, disappointments will well be encountered. We tabulate a few instances that have been brought to our notice:

a) Visiting pioneers or teachers may find in some places newly enrolled believers not so enthusiastic about their religion as expected, or not adjusting to standards of Bahá’í life, or they may find them thinking of material benefits they may hope to derive from their new membership. We should always remember that the process of nursing the believer into full spiritual maturity is slow, and needs loving education and patience.
b) Some teaching committees, in their eagerness to obtain results, place undue emphasis on obtaining a great number of declarations to the detriment of the quality of teaching.
c) Some travelling teachers, in their desire to show the result of their services, may not scrupulously teach their contacts, and in some rare cases, if, God forbid, they are insincere, may even give false reports.
18.17 Such irregularities have happened and can be repeated, but must not be a source of discouragement. By sending a team of teachers to an area, or by sending at intervals other teachers to those areas, and through correspondence and reports, such situations can be detected and immediately adjusted. The administration of the Faith must at all times keep in close touch with the teaching work.

18.18 To sum up:

Teaching the waiting masses is a reality facing each National Assembly.
The friends must teach with conviction, determination, genuine love, lack of prejudice, and in a simple language addressed to the heart.
Teaching must be followed up by training courses, conferences, and regular visits to deepen the believers in their knowledge of the Teachings.
The close touch of the National Office or Teaching Committees with the work is most essential, so that through reports and correspondence not only is information obtained and verified, but stimulation and encouragement is given.
Expansion and consolidation go hand in hand.


/*chapter*/Universal Participation
September 1964

To the Bahá’ís of the World

Dearly loved Friends,

19.1 In our message to you of April, 1964, announcing the Nine Year Plan, we called attention to two major themes of that Plan, namely "a huge expansion of the Cause of God and universal participation by all believers in the life of that Cause."

19.2 The enthusiastic vigor with which the believers throughout the world, under the devoted guidance of their National Spiritual Assemblies, have, arisen to meet the challenge of the Plan, augurs well for the huge expansion called for. We now ask you to bend your efforts and thoughts, with equal enthusiasm, to the requirements of universal participation.

19.3 In that same message we indicated the meaning of universal participation: "the dedicated effort of every believer in teaching, in living the Bahá’í life, in contributing to the Fund, and particularly in the persistent effort to understand more and more the significance of Bahá’u’lláh's Revelation. In the words of our beloved Guardian, 'One thing and only one thing will unfailingly and alone secure the undoubted triumph of this sacred Cause, namely the extent to which our own inner life and private character mirror forth in their manifold aspects the splendor of those eternal principles proclaimed by Bahá’u’lláh.'"[1]

19.4 "Regard the world as the human body," wrote Bahá’u’lláh to Queen Victoria.[2] We can surely regard the Bahá’í world, the army of God, in the same way. In the human body, every cell, every organ, every nerve has its part to play. When all do so the body is healthy, vigorous, radiant, ready for every call made upon it. No cell, however humble, lives apart from the body, whether in serving it or receiving from it. This is true of the body of mankind in which God "hast endowed each and all with talents and faculties,"[3] and is supremely true of the body of the Bahá’í World Community, for this body is already an organism, united in its aspirations, unified in its methods, seeking assistance and confirmation from the same Source, and illumined with the conscious knowledge of its unity. Therefore, in this organic, divinely guided, blessed and illumined body the participation of every believer is of the utmost importance, and is a source of power and vitality as yet unknown to us. For extensive and deep as has been the sharing in the glorious work of the Cause, who would claim that every single believer has succeeded in finding his or her fullest satisfaction in the life of the Cause? The Bahá’í World Community, growing like a healthy new body, develops new cells, new organs, new functions and powers as it presses on to its maturity, when every soul, living for the Cause of God, will receive from that Cause, health, assurance and the overflowing bounties of Bahá’u’lláh which are diffused through His divinely ordained order.

19.5 In addition to teaching every believer can pray. Every believer can strive to make his "own inner life and private character mirror forth in their manifold aspects the splendor of those eternal principles proclaimed by Bahá’u’lláh."[4] Every believer can contribute to the Fund. Not all believers can give public talks, not all are called upon to serve on administrative institutions. But all can pray, fight their own spiritual battles, and contribute to the Fund. If every believer will carry out these sacred duties, we shall be astonished at the accession of power which will result to the whole body, and which in its turn will give rise to further growth and the showering of greater blessings on all of us.

19.6 The real secret of universal participation lies in the Master's oft expressed wish that the friends should love each other, constantly encourage each other, work together, be as one soul in one body, and in so doing become a true, organic, healthy body animated and illumined by the spirit. In such a body all will receive spiritual health and vitality from the organism itself, and the most perfect flowers and fruits will be brought forth.

19.7 Our prayers for the happiness and success of the friends everywhere are constantly offered at the Holy Shrines.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Development of the Institution of the Hands of the Cause of God
November 1964

To the Bahá’ís of the World

Beloved Friends,

20.1 Once again the World Center of our Faith has been the scene of historic events, affecting profoundly the immediate prosecution of the Nine Year Plan and the future development of the World Order of Bahá’u’lláh. The occasion was the gathering in the Holy Land, for a period of fourteen days, of the Hands of the Cause of God to discuss their vital responsibilities, and particularly as Standard-bearers of the Nine Year Plan.

20.2 The Universal House of Justice took advantage of this opportunity not only to receive the advice, opinions and views of the Hands on the progress of the Nine Year Plan but to consult them on the highly important goal announced at Riḍván 1964 under World Center Goals as "Development of the Institution of the Hands of the Cause of God, in consultation with the body of the Hands of the Cause, with a view to the extension into the future of its appointed functions of protection and propagation."

20.3 It was apparent that the elucidation of this vital goal, affecting as it does the relationship of the Hands of the Cause of God to all other institutions of the Cause, was imperative to the prosecution of the all-important teaching work and the development of the Bahá’í World Order.

20.4 Accordingly, the Universal House of Justice gave its full attention to this matter and, after study of the sacred texts and hearing the views of the Hands of the Cause themselves, has arrived at the following decisions:

20.4a There is no way to appoint, or to legislate to make it possible to appoint, Hands of the Cause of God.
20.4b Responsibility for decisions on matters of general policy affecting the Institution of the Hands of the Cause, which was formerly exercised by the beloved Guardian, now devolves upon the Universal House of Justice as the supreme and central institution of the Faith to which all must turn.
20.5 It is with great joy that we are able to share with you the initial steps now taken to attain the goal.


Continental zones

20.6 The assignment of the Hands to various continents remains unchanged but, in order to expedite the work, the continents of Asia and the Western Hemisphere will each be divided into zones for the day-to-day work of the [Page 45]Hands, one or more Hands being responsible for each zone. Asia will consist of two zones: the Middle East comprising the countries from and including Pakistan westwards and also Asiatic U.S.S.R.; and South and East Asia comprising the remainder of the continent. The Western Hemisphere will consist of three zones: North America, Central America (including Mexico) and the Antilles, and South America. The Hawaiian Islands will be in the Australasian continental area, as listed in the recently issued statistical summary.


Increases in membership of Auxiliary Boards

20.7 The number of members of the Auxiliary Boards for the propagation of the Faith will be increased in every continent, raising the total number of Auxiliary Board members in Africa from eighteen to twenty-seven; in Asia from fourteen to thirty-six; in Australasia from four to nine; in Europe from eighteen to twenty-seven; and in the Western Hemisphere from eighteen to thirty-six.

20.8 The Hands of the Cause in each continent are called upon to appoint one or more members of their Auxiliary Boards to act in an executive capacity on behalf of and in the name of each Hand, thereby assisting him in carrying out his work.


Freeing Hands of the Cause from elected or appointed positions

20.9 The exalted rank and specific functions of the Hands of the Cause of God make it inappropriate for them to be elected or appointed to administrative institutions, or to be elected as delegates to national conventions. Furthermore, it is their desire and the desire of the House of Justice that they be free to devote their entire energies to the vitally important duties conferred upon them in the Holy Writings. The importance of close collaboration between the Hands of the Cause and National Spiritual Assemblies cannot be over-stressed, and a separate communication is being addressed to National Assemblies on this subject, supplementing guidance given in earlier letters.[1]

20.10 We anticipate announcing at Riḍván 1965 plans for Oceanic and Intercontinental Conferences, an overall plan for world-wide proclamation of the Faith during 1967-68, the centenary year of the revelation of the Súriy-i-Mulúk,[2] involving cooperation of National and Local Assemblies throughout the world, and conditions of entry for a competition for the design of the Mashriqu’l-Adhkár of Panama.

20.11 Teaching the masses is the greatest challenge now facing the followers of Bahá’u’lláh. No work is more important than that of carrying His Message with utmost speed to the bewildered and thirsting peoples of a spiritually[Page 46] parched world. Now, as the Hands return to their various continents, reinforced by a wider and more efficient organization of their work, we are confident that the whole Bahá’í world will, with rising enthusiasm and ever-increasing success, press forward with the teaching work, greatly increase the flow of pioneers, more widely participate in the financial support of the work of the Cause and add rapidly to the list of goals already accomplished.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Relationship of Hands of the Cause of God and the National Spiritual Assemblies
November 1964

To National Spiritual Assemblies of the Bahá’í World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

21.1 The gathering in the Holy Land of the Hands of the Cause of God has been an occasion of vital significance to the Faith. Please share the enclosed general message, as soon as possible, with all believers under your jurisdiction.[1]

21.2 We now wish to elaborate the recent decisions as they affect the relationship between the Institution of the Hands of the Cause and yourselves, the National Spiritual Assemblies of the world.

21.3 It is of the utmost importance that the Hands of the Cause and National Spiritual Assemblies be fully informed of the situation of the Cause in the areas for which they are responsible. We ask you therefore to work out with the Hands in your continent more efficient and easier methods of communication. The sharing of National Assembly minutes with the Hands of the Cause is entirely a matter for each National Spiritual Assembly to decide, but it is vitally important for you to regularly provide the Hands of the Cause with all information which is necessary to their work, including copies of pertinent committee reports.

21.4 The Hands of the Cause are preparing a schedule of proposed meetings with National Assemblies and will also be inviting members of National Assemblies to meet them in conferences with their Board members from time to time, a form of consultation which has been found most effective wherever it has been practised.

21.5 Members of Auxiliary Boards should be freed from administrative responsibilities including serving on Committees and as delegates to conventions. In the event of any member of a National Assembly accepting appointment to a Board, the National Assembly should accept this as valid reason for that member's resignation from the Assembly; should a Board member be elected to a National Assembly, he must choose on which body he will serve.

21.6 We ask each National Assembly to extend a warm and cordial invitation to the Hands of its continent to attend its national convention. All Hands of the Cause present should be given the freedom of the convention. If no continental Hands can attend a convention they may appoint one or two Board members to act as special deputies for that convention, who will, of course, be warmly welcomed and given the courtesy of taking part in convention as deputies of the Hands.

21.7 The increase in the numbers of Board members will inevitably be reflected in an increase in the needs of the Continental Funds. This is a matter for discussion with the Hands in your continent, and we feel sure that you will do your utmost to meet the new requirements, bearing in mind the importance which the beloved Guardian attached to direct contributions to these Funds by National and Local Spiritual Assemblies, as well as by individual believers.

21.8 The fostering of this important relationship between the exalted body of the Hands of the Cause and the National Spiritual Assemblies of the Bahá’í world will inevitably strengthen the foundation and functioning of the Cause of God and enable its embryonic world order to grow as a healthy tree under whose shade all mankind will eventually find security and peace.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Appointment of five Continental Pioneer Committees
8 February 1965

To the National Spiritual Assemblies of Australia, the British Isles, Germany, Persia and the United States

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

22.1 To intensify the prosecution of the Nine Year Plan we call upon your Assemblies to appoint Pioneer Committees respectively for Australasia, Africa, Europe, Asia and the Americas for raising up and deploying the huge army of pioneers necessary to win the goals of the Plan.

22.2 The importance of this step is emphasized by the need, during the coming Bahá’í year, to settle no less than four hundred and two pioneers in teaching and consolidation areas―twenty-eight for Australasia, seventy-one for Africa, sixty-seven for Europe, one hundred and sixty-eight for Asia, and sixty-eight for the Americas.

22.3 These Pioneer Committees, to be appointed by and be responsible to your respective National Assemblies, will have functions set forth in the enclosed outline.[1] Since they are essentially service committees, a membership of three will suffice. The secretary should be a competent and knowledgeable Bahá’í having time, ability and facilities for carrying on a volume of correspondence. All members of the committee should have organizing ability as well as an aptitude for dealing with problems in a warm and loving Bahá’í way.

22.4 The Pioneer Committees will in no way infringe upon or substitute for existing committees which your Assemblies may have already appointed to deal with the teaching and pioneer requirements of either internal or external goals assigned to your Assembly. Rather they will supplement the work of existing committees of all National Assemblies in the respective continental areas, provide an effective means of exchange of vital information, and assist in the processing of pioneer applications and the transfer of pioneers to goal areas.

22.5 The Pioneer Committees should be appointed immediately, and, as soon as acceptances have been received and the committees organized, you should send us the names of the committee members and the address of the committee for inclusion in a dossier to be sent to all National Assemblies as an addendum to the Riḍván message.

22.6 The Pioneer Committees should be prepared to assume their full responsibilities and functions at Riḍván so that no time will be lost in the rapid transfer of pioneers to their posts, thus avoiding any possible dampening of their spirits.

22.7 In the meantime, we will be forwarding additional information and instructions which will enable the committees to swing into action at Convention time. Since announcement of the appointment of these committees will be a part of the Riḍván message, your Assembly should wait until the Convention to inform the friends of these plans.

22.8 Time is of the essence. It is imperative that we have the names of Pioneer Committee members and the address of the committee within thirty days of your receipt of these instructions.

22.9 Assuring you of prayers at the Holy Shrines.

Deepest love,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


Pioneer Committees
Responsibilities and Functions
22.10 I. To assist National Spiritual Assemblies and their relevant committees in the following respects:

a. Information on availability and qualifications of pioneers.
b. Act as a clearing house for information both continentally and inter- continentally.
c. Determine travel and subsistence budgets needed.
d. Supply information on needs for pioneers in various localities within their respective continental areas, this information to be furnished initially by the Universal House of Justice, and any later needs to be cleared through the Universal House of Justice.
e. Supply information on the types of pioneering service needed in specific localities, such as: for teaching in mass conversion areas, or for deepening in administration; also special qualifications for pioneers to specific localities (e.g., language, ethnic background, work opportunities, etc.), and useful information about the territory itself (e.g., climate, geography, living conditions, visas and governmental regulations).
22.11 II. To assist prospective pioneers in the following respects:

a. Place them in contact with the National Assemblies and/or national committees responsible for settling or consolidating specific localities in which pioneers would like to serve or are qualified to serve.
b. Furnish useful information (such as that set forth in items I. d and e above) which will enable the prospective pioneers to determine where, when and how they can best volunteer their services.
c. Work out, in consultation with the relevant National Assembly and the prospective pioneer, such assistance budgets as may be necessary.
22.12 The Committee will obtain the information called for above from the various National Assemblies (or their committees) in their continental areas, and there should be an exchange of vital information between the five Pioneer Committees.

22.13 Pioneer Committees will in no case assume direct responsibility for filling goals. Their function is in the nature of secondary assistance to the responsible or assisting National Assembly (or national committee). If a National Assembly can fill a goal without assistance, it need not consult a Pioneer Committee, but should keep the relevant Pioneer Committee informed as to the status of pioneer goals.

22.14 Pioneer Committees will clear with the prospective pioneer's own National Assembly before offering his services.

22.15 Foremost is the Pioneer Committee's responsibility to expedite and facilitate the transfer of pioneers from the place where they are to the goal areas where they will serve. Only such procedures as will be useful to this purpose should be adopted.


/*chapter*/Election and Infallibility of the Universal House of Justice
9 March 1965

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the Netherlands

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

23.1 We are glad that you have brought to our attention the questions perplexing some of the believers. It is much better for these questions to be put freely and openly than to have them, unexpressed, burdening the hearts of devoted believers. Once one grasps certain basic principles of the Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh such uncertainties are easily dispelled. This is not to say that the Cause of God contains no mysteries. Mysteries there are indeed, but they are not of a kind to shake one's faith once the essential tenets of the Cause and the indisputable facts of any situation are clearly understood.

23.2 The questions put by the various believers fall into three groups. The first group centers upon the following queries: Why were steps taken to elect a Universal House of Justice with the foreknowledge that there would be no Guardian? Was the time ripe for such an action? Could not the International Bahá’í Council have carried on the work?


The Election of the Universal House of Justice

23.3 At the time of our beloved Shoghi Effendi's death it was evident, from the circumstances and from the explicit requirements of the Holy Texts, that it had been impossible for him to appoint a successor in accordance with the provisions of the Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. This situation, in which the Guardian died without being able to appoint a successor, presented an obscure question not covered by the explicit Holy Text, and had to be referred to the Universal House of Justice. The friends should clearly understand that before the election of the Universal House of Justice there was no knowledge that there would be no Guardian. There could not have been any such foreknowledge, whatever opinions individual believers may have held. Neither the Hands of the Cause of God, nor the International Bahá’í Council, nor any other existing body could make a decision upon this all-important matter.[1] Only the House of Justice had authority to pronounce upon it. This was one urgent reason for calling the election of the Universal House of Justice as soon as possible.

23.4 Following the passing of Shoghi Effendi the international administration of the Faith was carried on by the Hands of the Cause of God with the complete agreement and loyalty of the National Spiritual Assemblies and the body of the believers. This was in accordance with the Guardian's designation of the Hands as the "Chief Stewards of Bahá’u’lláh's embryonic World Commonwealth."[2]

23.5 From the very outset of their custodianship of the Cause of God the Hands realized that since they had no certainty of divine guidance such as is incontrovertibly assured to the Guardian and to the Universal House of Justice, their one safe course was to follow with undeviating firmness the instructions and policies of Shoghi Effendi. The entire history of religion shows no comparable record of such strict self-discipline, such absolute loyalty and such complete self-abnegation by the leaders of a religion finding themselves suddenly deprived of their divinely inspired guide. The debt of gratitude which mankind for generations, nay, ages to come, owes to this handful of grief-stricken, steadfast, heroic souls is beyond estimation.

23.6 The Guardian had given the Bahá’í world explicit and detailed plans covering the period until Riḍván 1963, the end of the Ten Year Crusade. From that point onward, unless the Faith were to be endangered, further divine guidance was essential. This was the second pressing reason for the calling of the election of the Universal House of Justice. The rightness of the time was further confirmed by references in Shoghi Effendi's letters to the Ten Year Crusade's being followed by other plans under the direction of the Universal House of Justice. One such reference is the following passage from a letter addressed to the National Spiritual Assembly of the British Isles on 25 February 1951, concerning its Two Year Plan which immediately preceded the Ten Year Crusade:

23.6a On the success of this enterprise, unprecedented in its scope, unique in its character and immense in its spiritual potentialities, must depend the initiation, at a later period in the Formative Age of the Faith, of undertakings embracing within their range all National Assemblies functioning throughout the Bahá’í world―undertakings constituting in themselves a prelude to the launching of worldwide enterprises destined to be embarked upon, in future epochs of that same Age, by the Universal House of Justice, that will symbolize the unity and coordinate and unify the activities of these National Assemblies.[3]
23.7 Having been in charge of the Cause of God for six years, the Hands, with absolute faith in the Holy Writings, called upon the believers to elect the Universal House of Justice, and even went so far as to ask that they themselves be not voted for. The sole, sad instance of anyone succumbing to the allurements of power was the pitiful attempt of Charles Mason Remey to usurp the Guardianship.[4]


Principles governing the election of the House of Justice

23.8 The following excerpts from a Tablet of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá state clearly and emphatically the principles with which the friends are already familiar from the Will and Testament of the Master and the various letters of Shoghi Effendi, and explain the basis for the election of the Universal House of Justice. This Tablet was sent to Persia by the beloved Guardian himself, in the early years of his ministry, for circulation among the believers.

23.9 . . . for ‘Abdu’l-Bahá is in a tempest of dangers and infinitely abhors differences of opinion . . . Praise be to God, there are no grounds for differences.
23.10 The Báb, the Exalted One, is the Morn of Truth, the splendor of Whose light shineth through all regions. He is also the Harbinger of the Most Great Light, the Abhá Luminary. The Blessed Beauty is the One promised by the sacred books of the past, the revelation of the Source of light that shone upon Mount Sinai, Whose fire glowed in the midst of the Burning Bush. We are, one and all, servants of Their threshold, and stand each as a lowly keeper at Their door.
23.11 My purpose is this, that ere the expiration of a thousand years, no one has the right to utter a single word, even to claim the station of Guardianship. The Most Holy Book is the Book to which all peoples shall refer, and in it the Laws of God have been revealed. Laws not mentioned in the Book should be referred to the decision of the Universal House of Justice. There will be no grounds for difference . . . Beware, beware lest anyone create a rift or stir up sedition. Should there be differences of opinion, the Supreme House of Justice would immediately resolve the problems. Whatever will be its decision, by majority vote, shall be the real truth, inasmuch as that House is under the protection, unerring guidance and care of the one true Lord. He shall guard it from error and will protect it under the wing of His sanctity and infallibility. He who opposes it is cast out and will eventually be of the defeated.
23.12 The Supreme House of Justice should be elected according to the system followed in the election of the parliaments of Europe. And when the countries would be guided, the Houses of Justice of the various countries would elect the Supreme House of Justice.
23.13 At whatever time all the beloved of God in each country appoint their delegates, and these in turn elect their representatives, and these representatives elect a body, that body shall be regarded as the Supreme House of Justice.
23.14 The establishment of that House is not dependent upon the conversion of all the nations of the world. For example, if conditions were favorable and no disturbances would be caused, the friends in Persia would elect their representatives, and likewise the friends in America, in India, and other areas would also elect their representatives, and these would elect a House of Justice. That House of Justice would be the Supreme House of Justice. That is all.
(Makatib-i-‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Vol. III, pp. 500-501)
23.15 The friends should realize that there is nothing in the Texts to indicate that the election of the Universal House of Justice could be called only by the Guardian. On the contrary, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá envisaged the calling of its election in His own lifetime. At a time described by the Guardian as "the darkest moments of His [the Master's] life, under ‘Abdu’l-Ḥamíd's regime, when He stood ready to be deported to the most inhospitable regions of Northern Africa," and when even His life was threatened, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá wrote to Ḥájí Mírzá Táqí Afnán, the cousin of the Báb and chief builder of the ‘Ishqabád Temple, commanding him to arrange for the election of the Universal House of Justice should the threats against the Master materialize.[5] The second part of the Master's Will is also relevant to such a situation and should be studied by the friends.


The Authority of the Universal House of Justice

23.16 The second series of problems vexing some of the friends centers on the question of the infallibility of the Universal House of Justice and its ability to function without the presence of the Guardian. Particular difficulty has been experienced in understanding the implications of the following statement by the beloved Guardian:

23.16a Divorced from the institution of the Guardianship the World Order of Bahá’u’lláh would be mutilated and permanently deprived of that hereditary principle which, as ‘Abdu’l-Bahá has written, has been invariably upheld by the Law of God. "In all the Divine Dispensations," He states, in a Tablet addressed to a follower of the Faith in Persia, "the eldest son hath been given extraordinary distinctions. Even the station of prophethood hath been his birthright." Without such an institution the integrity of the Faith would be imperiled, and the stability of the entire fabric would be gravely endangered. Its prestige would suffer, the means required to enable it to take a long, an uninterrupted view over a series of generations would be completely lacking, and the necessary guidance to define the sphere of the legislative action of its elected representatives would be totally withdrawn.
("The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh," The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 148)
23.17 Let the friends who wish for a clearer understanding of this passage at the present time consider it in the light of the many other texts which deal with the same subject, for example the following passages gleaned from the letters of Shoghi Effendi:

23.17a They have also, in unequivocal and emphatic language, appointed those twin institutions of the House of Justice and of the Guardianship as their chosen Successors, destined to apply the principles, promulgate the laws, protect the institutions, adapt loyally and intelligently the Faith to the requirements of progressive society, and consummate the incorruptible inheritance which the Founders of the Faith have bequeathed to the world.
(Letter dated 21 March 1930, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 20)
23.17b It must be also clearly understood by every believer that the institution of Guardianship does not under any circumstances abrogate, or even in the slightest degree detract from, the powers granted to the Universal House of Justice by Bahá’u’lláh in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, and repeatedly and solemnly confirmed by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in His Will. It does not constitute in any manner a contradiction to the Will and Writings of Bahá’u’lláh, nor does it nullify any of His revealed instructions. It enhances the prestige of that exalted assembly, stabilizes its supreme position, safeguards its unity, assures the continuity of its labors, without presuming in the slightest to infringe upon the inviolability of its clearly defined sphere of jurisdiction. We stand indeed too close to so monumental a document to claim for ourselves a complete understanding of all its implications, or to presume to have grasped the manifold mysteries it undoubtedly contains. . . .
(Letter dated 27 February 1929, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 8)
23.17c From these statements it is made indubitably clear and evident that the Guardian of the Faith has been made the Interpreter of the Word and that the Universal House of Justice has been invested with the function of legislating on matters not expressly revealed in the teachings. The interpretation of the Guardian, functioning within his own sphere, is as authoritative and binding as the enactments of the International House of Justice, whose exclusive right and prerogative is to pronounce upon and deliver the final judgement on such laws and ordinances as Bahá’u’lláh has not expressly revealed. Neither can, nor will ever, infringe upon the sacred and prescribed domain of the other. Neither will seek to curtail the specific and undoubted authority with which both have been divinely invested.
("The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh," The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, pp. 149-50)
23.17d Each exercises, within the limitations imposed upon it, its powers, its authority, its rights and prerogatives. These are neither contradictory, nor detract in the slightest degree from the position which each of these institutions occupies.
("The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh," The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 148)
23.17e Though the Guardian of the Faith has been made the permanent head of so august a body he can never, even temporarily, assume the right of exclusive legislation. He cannot override the decision of the majority of his fellow-members . . .
("The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh," The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 150)
23.18 Above all, let the hearts of the friends be assured by these words of Bahá’u’lláh:

23.18a The Hand of Omnipotence hath established His Revelation upon an unassailable, an enduring foundation. Storms of human strife are powerless to, undermine its basis, nor will men's fanciful theories succeed in damaging its structure.
(The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 109)
and these of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá:

23.18b Verily, God effecteth that which He pleaseth; naught can annul His Covenant; naught can obstruct His favor nor oppose His Cause! He doeth with His will that which pleaseth Him and He is powerful over all things! . . .
(Tablets of Abdul-Baha Abbas, Vol. III, p. 598)
23.19 It should be understood by the friends that before legislating upon any matter the Universal House of Justice studies carefully and exhaustively both the Sacred Texts and the Writings of Shoghi Effendi on the subject. The interpretations written by the beloved Guardian cover a vast range of subjects and are equally as binding as the Text itself.


Interpretations of the Guardian and Elucidations of the Universal House of Justice

23.20 There is a profound difference between the interpretations of the Guardian and the elucidations of the House of Justice in exercise of its function to "deliberate upon all problems which have caused difference, questions that are obscure and matters that are not expressly recorded in the Book." The Guardian reveals what the Scripture means; his interpretation is a statement of truth which cannot be varied. Upon the Universal House of Justice, in the words of the Guardian, "has been conferred the exclusive right of legislating on matters not expressly revealed in the Bahá’í writings."[6] Its pronouncements, which are susceptible of amendment or abrogation by the House of Justice itself, serve to supplement and apply the Law of God. Although not invested with the function of interpretation, the House of Justice is in a position to do everything necessary to establish the World Order of Bahá’u’lláh on this earth. Unity of doctrine is maintained by the existence of the authentic texts of Scripture and the voluminous interpretations of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi together with the absolute prohibition against anyone propounding "authoritative" or "inspired" interpretations or usurping the function of Guardian. Unity of administration is assured by the authority of the Universal House of Justice.

23.21 "Such," in the words of Shoghi Effendi, "is the immutability of His revealed Word. Such is the elasticity which characterizes the functions of His appointed ministers. The first preserves the identity of His Faith, and guards the integrity of His law. The second enables it, even as a living organism, to expand and adapt itself to the needs and requirements of an ever-changing society."

(Letter dated 21 March 1930, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 23)
23.22 Every true believer, if he is to deepen in his understanding of the Cause of Bahá’u’lláh must needs combine profound faith in the unfailing efficacy of His Message and His Covenant, with the humility of recognizing that no one of this generation can claim to have embraced the vastness of His Cause nor to have comprehended the manifold mysteries and potentialities it contains. The words of Shoghi Effendi bear ample testimony to this fact:

23.22a How vast is the Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh! How great the magnitude of His blessings showered upon humanity in this day! And yet, how poor, how inadequate our conception of their significance and glory! This generation stands too close to so colossal a Revelation to appreciate, in their full measure, the infinite possibilities of His Faith, the unprecedented character of His Cause, and the mysterious dispensations of His Providence.
(Letter dated 21 March 1930, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 24)
23.22b We are called upon by our beloved Master in His Will and Testament not only to adopt it [Bahá’u’lláh's new world order] unreservedly, but to unveil its merit to all the world. To attempt to estimate its full value, and grasp its exact significance after so short a time since its inception would be premature and presumptuous on our part. We must trust to time, and the guidance of God's Universal House of Justice, to obtain a clearer and fuller understanding of its provisions and implications. . . .
(Letter dated 23 February 1924, published in Bahá’í Administration, p. 62)
23.22c As to the order and the management of the spiritual affairs of the friends, that which is very important now is the consolidation of the Spiritual Assemblies in every center, because on these fortified and unshakeable foundations, God's Supreme House of Justice shall be erected and firmly established in the days to come. When this most great Edifice shall be reared on such an immovable foundation, Gods purpose, wisdom, universal truths, mysteries and realities of the Kingdom, which the mystic revelation of Bahá’u’lláh has deposited within the Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, shall gradually be revealed and made manifest.
(Letter dated 19 December 1923―translated from the Persian)
23.23 Statements such as these indicate that the full meaning of the Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, as well as an understanding of the implications of the World Order ushered in by that remarkable document can be revealed only gradually to men's eyes, and after the Universal House of Justice has come into being. The friends are called upon to trust to time and to await the guidance of the Universal House of Justice, which, as circumstances require, will make pronouncements that will resolve and clarify obscure matters.


The Authority to Expel Members of the House of Justice

23.24 The third group of queries raised by the friends concerns details of functioning of the Universal House of Justice in the absence of the Guardian, particularly the matter of expulsion of members of the House of Justice. Such questions will be clarified in the Constitution of the House of Justice, the formulation of which is a goal of the Nine Year Plan. Meanwhile the friends are informed that any member committing a "sin injurious to the common weal," may be expelled from membership of the House of Justice by a majority vote of the House itself.[7] Should any member, God forbid, be guilty of breaking the Covenant, the matter would be investigated by the Hands of the Cause of God, and the Covenant-breaker would be expelled by decision of the Hands of the Cause of God residing in the Holy Land, subject to the approval of the House of Justice, as in the case of any other believer. The decision of the Hands in such a case would be announced to the Bahá’í world by the Universal House of Justice.

23.25 We are certain that when you share this letter with the friends and they have these quotations from the Scriptures and the Writings of the Guardian drawn to their attention, their doubts and misgivings will be dispelled and they will be able to devote their every effort to spreading the Message of Bahá’u’lláh, serenely confident in the power of His Covenant to overcome whatever tests an inscrutable Providence may shower upon it, thus demonstrating its ability to redeem a travailing world and to upraise the Standard of the Kingdom of God on earth.

With loving greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Leroy Ioas
22 July 1965

To the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States

25.1 GRIEVE ANNOUNCE PASSING OUTSTANDING HAND CAUSE LEROY IOAS. HIS LONG SERVICE BAHÁ’Í COMMUNITY UNITED STATES CROWNED ELEVATION RANK HAND FAITH PAVING WAY HISTORIC DISTINGUISHED SERVICES HOLY LAND. APPOINTMENT FIRST SECRETARY GENERAL INTERNATIONAL BAHÁ’Í COUNCIL PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE GUARDIAN FAITH TWO INTERCONTINENTAL CONFERENCES ASSOCIATION HIS NAME BY BELOVED GUARDIAN OCTAGON DOOR BÁB'S SHRINE TRIBUTE SUPERVISORY WORK DRUM DOME THAT HOLY SEPULCHER NOTABLE PART ERECTION INTERNATIONAL ARCHIVES BUILDING ALL ENSURE HIS NAME IMMORTAL ANNALS FAITH. LAID TO REST BAHÁ’Í CEMETERY CLOSE FELLOW HANDS ADVISE HOLD BEFITTING MEMORIAL SERVICES. . . .[1]

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Purification of the Most Holy Shrine of Bahá’u’lláh, the Qiblih of the Bahá’í World
11 November 1965

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

26.1 ANNOUNCE BAHÁ’Í WORLD REMOVAL FROM IMMEDIATE PRECINCTS HOLY SHRINE BAHÁ’U’LLÁH REMAINS MÍRZÁ ḌÍYÁ’U’LLÁH YOUNGER BROTHER MÍRZÁ MUḤAMMAD-'ALI HIS ACCOMPLICE IN EFFORTS SUBVERT FOUNDATIONS COVENANT GOD SOON AFTER ASCENSION BAHÁ’U’LLÁH. THIS FINAL STEP IN PROCESS PURIFICATION SACRED INTERNATIONAL ENDOWMENTS FAITH IN BAHJÍ FROM PAST CONTAMINATION WAS PROVIDENTIALLY UNDERTAKEN UPON REQUEST FAMILY OLD COVENANT-BREAKERS A PROCESS WHOSE INITIAL STAGE WAS FULFILLED BY ‘ABDU’L-BAHÁ WHICH GATHERED MOMENTUM EARLY YEARS BELOVED GUARDIAN'S MINISTRY THROUGH EVACUATION MANSION ATTAINED CLIMAX THROUGH PURIFICATION ḤARAM-I-AQDAS AND NOW CONSUMMATED THROUGH CLEANSING INNER SANCTUARY MOST HALLOWED SHRINE QIBLIH BAHÁ’Í WORLD PRESAGING EVENTUAL CONSTRUCTION BEFITTING MAUSOLEUM AS ANTICIPATED BELOVED SIGN GOD ON EARTH.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Reasons for delay in translating and publishing the Kitáb-i-Aqdas
6 December 1965

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the United States

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

27.1 We have received a number of inquiries as to the translation and publication of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas from friends who are unable to read it in its original form. We feel the following extract from a letter written on behalf of the beloved Guardian by his secretary dated 27 December 1941, addressed to the National Spiritual Assembly of India and Burma clarifies this question:

27.1a The reason it [the Kitáb-i-Aqdas] is not circulated amongst all the Bahá’ís is, first, because the Cause is not yet ready or sufficiently matured to put all the provisions of the Aqdas into effect and, second, because it is a book which requires to be supplemented by detailed explanations and to be translated into other languages by a competent body of experts. The provisions of the Aqdas are gradually, according to the progress of the Cause, being put into effect already, both in the East and the West. . . .
27.2 As is well known, the beloved Guardian has already given in God Passes By, pp. 214-15, a summary of the contents of this Most Holy Book, and included the codification of all the laws of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas as one of the objectives of the Ten Year Crusade. It is the intention of the Universal House of Justice to achieve this objective by publishing a synopsis and codification of these laws during the current Nine Year Plan.

27.3 Much of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas has already been translated by the beloved Guardian and has been given to the friends in the West, although not designated, in every case, as coming from the Most Holy Book.[1] We give you below a list of such references for your guidance:

Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh	Sections XXXVII, LVI, LXX, LXXI, LXXII, XCVIII, CV, CIV, CLIX, and CLXV
The Promised Day is Come	pp. 26 (1st para.), 36-37 (until the end of 2nd para.), 40 (2nd para.), and 84-85 (until the end of 1st para.)
The Challenging Requirements of the Present Hour[2]	pp. 16-17 (until the end of 1st para.)
Bahá’í Administration	p. 21 (1st para.)
The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh	p. 134 (2nd para.)
The Bahá’í Community (1963 edition)	p. 4 (2nd & 3rd paras)
Star of the West, XIV	pp. 112-14
27.4 The two reasons given by the Guardian in the extract of the letter quoted above need further amplification:

27.4a 1. As regards the first reason, regarding the timeliness of putting into effect all the provisions of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, it must be borne in mind that the beloved Guardian further stated:
. . . the Laws revealed by Bahá’u’lláh in the Aqdas are, whenever practicable and not in direct conflict with the Civil Law of the land, absolutely binding on every believer or Bahá’í institution whether in the East or in the West. Certain laws, such as fasting, obligatory prayers, the consent of the parents before marriage, avoidance of alcoholic drinks, monogamy, should be regarded by all believers as universally and vitally applicable at the present time. Others have been formulated in anticipation of a state of society destined to emerge from the chaotic conditions that prevail today. When the Aqdas is published this matter will be further explained and elucidated. What has not been formulated in the Aqdas, in addition to matters of detail and of secondary importance arising out of the application of the Laws already formulated by Bahá’u’lláh, will have to be enacted by the Universal House of Justice. . . .(Bahá’í News, October 1935)
The Guardian has further written:
It should be noted in this connection that this Administrative Order is fundamentally different from anything that any Prophet has previously established, inasmuch as Bahá’u’lláh has Himself revealed its principles, established its institutions, appointed the person to interpret His Word and conferred the necessary authority on the body designed to supplement and apply His legislative ordinances. Therein lies the secret of its strength, its fundamental distinction, and the guarantee against disintegration and schism. . . .(The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 145)
27.4b 2. As to the second reason given by the beloved Guardian in the extract referred to above, it must be noted that the supplementary material to go with the publication of the laws of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas may well include the following items, all of which require careful research and translation:
a. The Annex to the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, the Questions and Answers. (God Passes By, p. 219)
b. Tablets of Bahá’u’lláh in "elaboration and elucidation of some of the laws He [Bahá’u’lláh] had already laid down." (God Passes By, p. 216)
c. Tablets of Bahá’u’lláh establishing "subsidiary ordinances designed to supplement the provisions of His Most Holy Book." (God Passes By, p. 216)
d. The Letters and Writings of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi in interpretation of the laws and ordinances of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas.
e. Other explanations and footnotes that may be required in elucidation of the provisions of that Book.
27.5 We hope the foregoing will clarify the matter for the friends. . . .

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Call for pioneers
10 December 1965

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

28.1 ANNOUNCE ALL BELIEVERS REJOICE RESPONSE BAHÁ’Í WORLD PIONEER CALL RAISED RIḌVÁN MESSAGE REQUIRING 460 PIONEERS COURSE CURRENT YEAR. THUS FAR 93 SETTLED POSTS INCLUDING 15 VIRGIN TERRITORIES ST. ANDRES ISLAND PROVIDENCIA ISLAND MARMARA ISLAND CHAD NIGER CAYMAN ISLANDS TURKS AND CAICOS ISCHIA GOTLAND ALASKA PENINSULA BARBUDA ST. KITTS-NEVIS INNER HEBRIDES BORNHOLM CAPRI 35 ADDITIONAL SETTLED SAME GOALS 167 MORE ARISEN AND IN PROCESS SETTLING TOTALING 295 SOULS RESPONDED CALL. FURTHER 200 BELIEVERS NEEDED NEXT FOUR SWIFTLY PASSING MONTHS FILL REMAINING GOALS. FATE PIONEER PLAN HANGING BALANCE PRAYING FERVENTLY HOLY SHRINES REQUIRED NUMBER HEROIC SOULS PROMPTLY ARISE MEET CHALLENGE CRITICAL HOUR URGE NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES NEEDING FUNDS EXECUTE ASSIGNMENTS APPLY IMMEDIATELY INTERNATIONAL DEPUTIZATION FUND. IMPERATIVE SETTLE ALL TERRITORIES ANNOUNCED RIḌVÁN EXCEPT THOSE DEPENDENT FAVORABLE CIRCUMSTANCES. VIRGIN AND RESETTLEMENT TERRITORIES PRIORITY CONFIDENT SPIRIT DEVOTION FRIENDS GLORIOUS FAITH ENSURE BRILLIANT VICTORY THIS PRIMARY OBJECTIVE SO VITAL NINE YEAR PLAN.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Observance of Bahá’í Holy Days
28 January 1966

To National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

29.1 From time to time questions have arisen about the application of the law of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas on the observance of Bahá’í Holy Days. As you know, the recognition of Bahá’í Holy Days in at least ninety-five countries of the world is an important and highly significant objective of the Nine Year Plan, and is directly linked with the recognition of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh by the civil authorities as an independent religion enjoying its own rights and privileges.

29.2 The attainment of this objective will be facilitated and enhanced if the friends, motivated by their own realization of the importance of the laws of Bahá’u’lláh, are obedient to them. For the guidance of believers we repeat the instructions of the beloved Guardian:

29.2a He wishes also to stress the fact that, according to our Bahá’í laws, work is forbidden on our nine Holy Days. Believers who have independent businesses or shops should refrain from working on these days. Those who are in government employ should, on religious grounds, make an effort to be excused from work; all believers, whoever their employers, should do likewise. If the government, or other employers, refuse to grant them these days off, they are not required to forfeit their employment, but they should make every effort to have the independent status of their Faith recognized and their right to hold their own religious Holy Days acknowledged.
(From letter written on behalf of the Guardian to the American National Spiritual Assembly, dated 7 July 1947―Bahá’í News, No. 198, p. 3)
29.2b This distinction between institutions that are under full or partial Bahá’í control is of a fundamental importance. Institutions that are entirely managed by Bahá’ís are, for reasons that are only too obvious, under the obligation of enforcing all the laws and ordinances of the Faith, especially those whose observance constitutes a matter of conscience. There is no reason, no justification whatever, that they should act otherwise . . . The point which should be always remembered is that the issue in question is essentially a matter of conscience, and as such is of a binding effect upon all believers. . . .
(From letter written on behalf of the Guardian to the American National Spiritual Assembly, dated 2 October 1935―Bahá’í News, No. 97, p. 9)
29.3 In addition, steps should be taken to have Bahá’í children excused, on religious grounds, from attending school on Bahá’í Holy Days wherever possible. The Guardian has said:

29.3a Regarding children: at fifteen a Bahá’í is of age as far as keeping the laws of the Aqdas is concerned―prayer, fasting, etc. But children under fifteen should certainly observe the Bahá’í Holy Days, and not go to school, if this can be arranged, on these nine days.
(From letter written on behalf of the Guardian to the American National Spiritual Assembly, dated 25 October 1947)
29.4 National Assemblies should give this subject their careful consideration, and should provide ways and means for bringing this matter to the attention of the believers under their jurisdiction so that, as a matter of conscience, the mass of believers will uphold these laws and observe them.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Further thoughts about mass teaching
2 February 1966

To all National Spiritual Assemblies engaged in mass teaching work

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

30.1 Since writing to the National Spiritual Assemblies of the world regarding the importance of teaching the masses, we have received reports from all over the world indicating the steady increase in the number of believers, the concentration of the friends on the more receptive areas, however remote these may have been, and the opening up of new and challenging fields for expansion and service. In this letter we wish once again to stress the importance of this subject, share with you our thoughts regarding the supreme need to preserve the victories you have already won and the necessity to pursue the vital work in which you are engaged and to which the eyes of your sister communities in East and West are turned with admiration.

30.2 It has been due to the splendid victories in large-scale conversion that the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh has entered a new phase in its development and establishment throughout the world. It is imperative, therefore, that the process of teaching the masses be not only maintained but accelerated. The teaching committee structure that each National Assembly may adopt to ensure best results in the extension of its teaching work is a matter left entirely to its discretion, but an efficient teaching structure there must be, so that the tasks are carried out with dispatch and in accordance with the administrative principles of our Faith. From among the believers native to each country, competent travelling teachers must be selected and teaching projects worked out. In the words of our beloved Guardian, commenting upon the teaching work in Latin America: "Strong and sustained support should be given to the vitally needed and highly meritorious activities started by the native . . . travelling teachers, . . . who, as the mighty task progresses, must increasingly bear the brunt of responsibility for the propagation of the Faith in their homelands."[1]

30.3 While this vital teaching work is progressing each National Assembly must ever bear in mind that expansion and consolidation are inseparable processes that must go hand in hand. The interdependence of these processes is best elucidated in the following passage from the writings of the beloved Guardian: "Every outward thrust into new fields, every multiplication of Bahá’í institutions, must be paralleled by a deeper thrust of the roots which sustain the spiritual life of the community and ensure its sound development. From this vital, this ever-present need attention must, at no time, be diverted; nor must it be, under any circumstances, neglected, or subordinated to the no less vital and urgent task of ensuring the outer expansion of Bahá’í administrative institutions. That this community . . . may maintain a proper balance between these two essential aspects of its development . . . is the ardent hope of my heart."[2] To ensure that the spiritual life of the individual believer is continuously enriched, that local communities are becoming increasingly conscious of their collective duties, and that the institutions of an evolving administration are operating efficiently, is, therefore, as important as expanding into new fields and bringing in the multitudes under the shadow of the Cause.

30.4 These objectives can only be attained when each National Spiritual Assembly makes proper arrangements for all the friends to be deepened in the knowledge of the Faith. The National Spiritual Assemblies in consultation with the Hands of the Cause, who are the Standard-bearers of the Nine Year Plan, should avail themselves of the assistance of Auxiliary Board members, who, together with the travelling teachers selected by the Assembly or its Teaching Committees, should be continuously encouraged to conduct deepening courses at Teaching Institutes and to make regular visits to Local Spiritual Assemblies. The visitors, whether Board members or travelling teachers should meet on such occasions not only with the Local Assembly but, of course, with the local community members, collectively at general meetings and even, if necessary, individually in their homes.

30.5 The subjects to be discussed at such meetings with the Local Assembly and the friends should include among others the following points:

the extent of the spread and stature of the Faith today;
the importance of the daily obligatory prayers (at least the short prayer);
the need to educate Bahá’í children in the Teachings of the Faith and encourage them to memorize some of the prayers;
the stimulation of youth to participate in community life by giving talks, etc. and having their own activities, if possible;
the necessity to abide by the laws of marriage, namely, the need to have a Bahá’í ceremony, to obtain the consent of parents, to observe monogamy; faithfulness after marriage; likewise the importance of abstinence from all intoxicating drinks and drugs;
the local Fund and the need for the friends to understand that the voluntary act of contributing to the Fund is both a privilege and a spiritual obligation. There should also be discussion of various methods that could be followed by the friends to facilitate their contributions and the ways open to the Local Assembly to utilize its local Fund to serve the interests of its community and the Cause;
the importance of the Nineteen Day Feast and the fact that it should be a joyful occasion and rallying point of the entire community;
the manner of election with as many workshops as required, including teaching of simple methods of balloting for illiterates, such as having one central home as the place for balloting and arranging for one literate person, if only a child, to be present at that home during the whole day, if necessary;
last but not least, the all-important teaching work, both in the locality and its neighboring centers, as well as the need to continuously deepen the friends in the essentials of the Faith. The friends should be made to realize that in teaching the Faith to others they should not only aim at assisting the seeking soul to join the Faith, but also at making him a teacher of the Faith and its active supporter.
30.6 All the above points should, of course, be stressed within the framework of the importance of the Local Spiritual Assembly, which should be encouraged to vigorously direct its attention to these vital functions and become the very heart of the community life of its own locality, even if its meetings should become burdened with the problems of the community. The local friends should understand the importance of the law of consultation and realize that it is to the Local Spiritual Assembly that they should turn, abide by its decisions, support its projects, cooperate wholeheartedly with it in its task to promote the interests of the Cause, and seek its advice and guidance in the solution of personal problems and the adjudication of disputes, should any arise amongst the members of the community.

30.7 As the Universal House of Justice intends to have on file a full record of the progress of the teaching work in large-scale conversion areas, we request you to send us any published material, such as forms, cards, pamphlets, pictures, audio-visual aids, deepening booklets, etc. that you are currently using, with adequate explanations by your Assembly as to how they are being used, and any comments you may wish to make about their usefulness. Your National Assembly should also feel free to share with us your problems and needs as well as any recommendations you may have. We are looking forward to receiving a prompt reply to this letter, as we feel that an early evaluation of the methods used in various fields of teaching is vital and essential at this time.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Call for pioneers and travelling teachers
18 March 1966

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

31.1 The message of the Universal House of Justice to the Bahá’í world this Riḍván will raise a call for volunteers to engage in travelling teaching in all parts of the world and for whatever periods of time are possible. The purpose is to develop a band of international teachers who will, by the very fact of being visitors from other countries, stimulate interest on the various home-fronts which they visit.

31.2 The Continental Pioneer Committees for Africa, the Americas, Asia, Australasia and Europe have been given the additional function of assisting National Assemblies to make the most efficient use of any who may volunteer to travel and teach in countries other than their own.[1] The procedures to be followed are attached to this letter. As you will note we are extending the use of the International Deputization Fund to deserving international teaching projects which cannot otherwise be financed.

31.3 This advanced information is given to National Assemblies so that they may be prepared to accept and utilize the offers of travelling teachers as soon as they arise.

31.4 It is requested that the subject of travelling teachers be placed on the Agenda for consultation at the National Convention, and that the friends be given every encouragement to respond to this call.

31.5 Since the announcement of this plan is a part of the Riḍván message, your Assembly should wait until the Convention before announcing it to the friends.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


31.6 P.S. The locale of the Pioneer Committee for Africa is being changed to Uganda effective at Riḍván. For the time being please contact the Committee in care of that National Assembly.


/*chapter*/Fiftieth Anniversary of the Revelation of the Tablets of the Divine Plan

22 March 1966

To the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the United States

32.1 JOYOUSLY HAIL FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY REVELATION FIRST OF TABLETS DIVINE PLAN CHARTER PROPAGATION FAITH THROUGHOUT WORLD.[1] PRAYING SHRINES OBSERVANCE OCCASION MAY BE SOURCE RENEWED ENTHUSIASM DEDICATION FRIENDS ACCOMPLISH GOALS WIN FRESH LAURELS SHARE NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES CANADA ALASKA HAWAII.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Passing of Jessie Revell, Member of the International Bahá’í Council
15 April 1966

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

33.1 WITH PROFOUND GRIEF ANNOUNCE PASSING JESSIE REVELL HER TIRELESS STEADFAST DEVOTION FAITH SINCE BEFORE MASTER'S VISIT AMERICAN CONTINENT EARNED LOVE TRUST ADMIRATION SHOGHI EFFENDI CROWNED BY APPOINTMENT INTERNATIONAL BAHÁ’Í COUNCIL DISTINGUISHED BY SERVICE TREASURER BOTH APPOINTED ELECTED COUNCILS.[1] URGE NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES HOLD MEMORIAL GATHERINGS TRIBUTE UNFORGETTABLE EXEMPLARY SERVICES FAITH. . . .

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/The Guardianship and the Universal House of Justice
27 May 1966

To an individual Bahá’í[1]

Dear Bahá’í Friend,

35.1 . . . You query the timing of the election of the Universal House of Justice in view of the Guardian's statement: ". . . given favorable circumstances, under which the Bahá’ís of Persia and of the adjoining countries under Soviet rule, may be enabled to elect their national representatives . . . the only remaining obstacle in the way of the definite formation of the International House of Justice will have been removed."[2] On 19 April 1947 the Guardian, in a letter written on his behalf by his secretary, replied to the inquiry of an individual believer about this passage: "At the time he referred to Russia there were Bahá’ís there, now the Community has practically ceased to exist; therefore the formation of the International House of Justice cannot depend on a Russian National Spiritual Assembly. But other strong National Spiritual Assemblies will have to be built up before it can be established."


The Provisions of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Will

35.2 You suggest the possibility that, for the good of the Cause, certain information concerning the succession to Shoghi Effendi is being withheld from the believers. We assure you that nothing whatsoever is being withheld from the friends for whatever reason. There is no doubt at all that in the Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá Shoghi Effendi was the authority designated to appoint his successor, but he had no children and all the surviving Aghṣán had broken the Covenant.[3] Thus, as the Hands of the Cause stated in 1957, it is clear that there was no one he could have appointed in accordance with the provisions of the Will. To have made an appointment outside the clear and specific provisions of the Master's Will and Testament would obviously have been an impossible and unthinkable course of action for the Guardian, the divinely appointed upholder and defender of the Covenant. Moreover, that same Will had provided a clear means for the confirmation of the Guardian's appointment of his successor, as you are aware. The nine Hands to be elected by the body of the Hands were to give their assent by secret ballot to the Guardian's choice. In 1957 the entire body of the Hands, after fully investigating the matter, announced that Shoghi Effendi had appointed no successor and left no will. This is documented and established.


A Sign of Infallible Guidance

35.3 The fact that Shoghi Effendi did not leave a will cannot be adduced as evidence of his failure to obey Bahá’u’lláh―rather should we acknowledge that in his very silence there is a wisdom and a sign of his infallible guidance. We should ponder deeply the writings that we have, and seek to understand the multitudinous significances that they contain. Do not forget that Shoghi Effendi said two things were necessary for a growing understanding of the World Order of Bahá’u’lláh: the passage of time and the guidance of the Universal House of Justice.


The Infallibility of the Universal House of Justice

35.4 The infallibility of the Universal House of Justice, operating within its ordained sphere, has not been made dependent upon the presence in its membership of the Guardian of the Cause. Although in the realm of interpretation the Guardian's pronouncements are always binding, in the area of the Guardian's participation in legislation it is always the decision of the House itself which must prevail. This is supported by the words of the Guardian: "The interpretation of the Guardian, functioning within his own sphere, is as authoritative and binding as the enactments of the International House of Justice, whose exclusive right and prerogative is to pronounce upon and deliver the final judgement on such laws and ordinances as Bahá’u’lláh has not expressly revealed. Neither can, nor will ever, infringe upon the sacred and prescribed domain of the other. Neither will seek to curtail the specific and undoubted authority with which both have been divinely invested.

35.5 "Though the Guardian of the Faith has been made the permanent head of so august a body he can never, even temporarily, assume the right of exclusive legislation. He cannot override the decision of the majority of his fellow-members, but is bound to insist upon a reconsideration by them of any enactment he conscientiously believes to conflict with the meaning and to depart from the spirit of Bahá’u’lláh's revealed utterances."[4]

35.6 However, quite apart from his function as a member and sacred head for life of the Universal House of Justice, the Guardian, functioning within his own sphere, had the right and duty "to define the sphere of the legislative action" of the Universal House of Justice.[5] In other words, he had the authority to state whether a matter was or was not already covered by the Sacred Texts and therefore whether it was within the authority of the Universal House of Justice to legislate upon it. No other person, apart from the Guardian, has the right or authority to make such definitions. The question therefore arises: In the absence of the Guardian, is the Universal House of Justice in danger of straying outside its proper sphere and thus falling into error? Here we must remember three things: First, Shoghi Effendi, during the thirty-six years of his Guardianship, has already made innumerable such definitions, supplementing those made by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and by Bahá’u’lláh Himself. As already announced to the friends, a careful study of the Writings and interpretations on any subject on which the House of Justice proposes to legislate always precedes its act of legislation. Second, the Universal House of Justice, itself assured of divine guidance, is well aware of the absence of the Guardian and will approach all matters of legislation only when certain of its sphere of jurisdiction, a sphere which the Guardian has confidently described as "clearly defined." Third, we must not forget the Guardian's written statement about these two Institutions: "Neither can, nor will ever, infringe upon the sacred and prescribed domain of the other."[6]

35.7 As regards the need to have deductions made from the Writings to help in the formulation of the enactments of the House of Justice, there is the following text from the pen of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá:

35.7a Those matters of major importance which constitute the foundation of the Law of God are explicitly recorded in the Text, but subsidiary laws are left to the House of Justice. The wisdom of this is that the times never remain the same, for change is a necessary quality and an essential attribute of this world, and of time and place. Therefore the House of Justice will take action accordingly.
35.7b Let it not be imagined that the House of Justice will take any decision according to its own concepts and opinions. God forbid! The Supreme House of Justice will take decisions and establish laws through the inspiration and confirmation of the Holy Spirit, because it is in the safekeeping and under the shelter and protection of the Ancient Beauty, and obedience to its decisions is a bounden and essential duty and an absolute obligation, and there is no escape for anyone.
35.7c Say, O people: Verily the Supreme House of Justice is under the wings of your Lord, the Compassionate, the All-Merciful, that is, under His protection, His care, and His shelter; for He has commanded the firm believers to obey that blessed, sanctified and all-subduing body, whose sovereignty is divinely ordained and of the Kingdom of Heaven and whose laws are inspired and spiritual.
35.7d Briefly, this is the wisdom of referring the laws of society to the House of Justice. In the religion of Islam, similarly, not every ordinance was explicitly revealed; nay not a tenth part of a tenth part was included in the Text; although all matters of major importance were specifically referred to, there were undoubtedly thousands of laws which were unspecified. These were devised by the divines of a later age according to the laws of Islamic jurisprudence, and individual divines made conflicting deductions from the original revealed ordinances. All these were enforced. Today this process of deduction is the right of the body of the House of Justice, and the deductions and conclusions of individual learned men have no authority, unless they are endorsed by the House of Justice. The difference is precisely this, that from the conclusions and endorsements of the body of the House of Justice whose members are elected by and known to the worldwide Bahá’í community, no differences will arise; whereas the conclusions of individual divines and scholars would definitely lead to differences, and result in schism, division, and dispersion. The oneness of the Word would be destroyed, the unity of the Faith would disappear, and the edifice of the Faith of God would be shaken.[7]

The Continuity of Authority

35.8 In the Order of Bahá’u’lláh there are certain functions which are reserved to certain institutions, and others which are shared in common, even though they may be more in the special province of one or the other. For example, although the Hands of the Cause of God have the specific functions of protection and propagation, and are specialized for these functions, it is also the duty of the Universal House of Justice and the Spiritual Assemblies to protect and teach the Cause―indeed teaching is a sacred obligation placed upon every believer by Bahá’u’lláh. Similarly, although after the Master authoritative interpretation was exclusively vested in the Guardian, and although legislation is exclusively the function of the Universal House of Justice, these two Institutions are, in Shoghi Effendi's words, "complementary in their aim and purpose." "Their common, their fundamental object is to ensure the continuity of that divinely appointed authority which flows from the Source of our Faith, to safeguard the unity of its followers and to maintain the integrity and flexibility of its teachings."[8] Whereas the Universal House of Justice cannot undertake any function which exclusively appertained to the Guardian, it must continue to pursue the object which it shares in common with the Guardianship.


The Principle of Inseparability

35.9 As you point out with many quotations, Shoghi Effendi repeatedly stressed the inseparability of these two institutions. Whereas he obviously envisaged their functioning together, it cannot logically be deduced from this that one is unable to function in the absence of the other. During the whole thirty-six years of his Guardianship Shoghi Effendi functioned without the Universal House of Justice. Now the Universal House of Justice must function without the Guardian, but the principle of inseparability remains. The Guardianship does not lose its significance nor position in the Order of Bahá’u’lláh merely because there is no living Guardian. We must guard against two extremes: one is to argue that because there is no Guardian all that was written about the Guardianship and its position in the Bahá’í World Order is a dead letter and was unimportant; the other is to be so overwhelmed by the significance of the Guardianship as to underestimate the strength of the Covenant, or to be tempted to compromise with the clear texts in order to find somehow, in some way, a Guardian."


Our Part―Fidelity, Integrity, And Faith

35.10 Service to the Cause of God requires absolute fidelity and integrity and unwavering faith in Him. No good but only evil can come from taking the responsibility for the future of God's Cause into our own hands and trying to force it into ways that we wish it to go regardless of the clear texts and our own limitations. It is His Cause. He has promised that its light will not fail. Our part is to cling tenaciously to the revealed Word and to the Institutions that He has created to preserve His Covenant.

35.11 It is precisely in this connection that the believers must recognize the importance of intellectual honesty and humility. In past dispensations many errors arose because the believers in God's Revelation were overanxious to encompass the Divine Message within the framework of their limited understanding, to define doctrines where definition was beyond their power, to explain mysteries which only the wisdom and experience of a later age would make comprehensible, to argue that something was true because it appeared desirable and necessary. Such compromises with essential truth, such intellectual pride, we must scrupulously avoid.

35.12 If some of the statements of the Universal House of Justice are not detailed the friends should realize that the cause of this is not secretiveness, but rather the determination of this body to refrain from interpreting the teachings and to preserve the truth of the Guardian's statement that "Leaders of religion, exponents of political theories, governors of human institutions . . . need have no doubt or anxiety regarding the nature, the origin, or validity of the institutions which the adherents of the Faith are building up throughout the world. For these lie embedded in the teachings themselves, unadulterated and unobscured by unwarrantable inferences, or unauthorized interpretations of His Word."[9]


Authoritative Interpretation and Individual Understanding

35.13 A clear distinction is made in our Faith between authoritative interpretation and the interpretation or understanding that each individual arrives at for himself from his study of its teachings. While the former is confined to the Guardian, the latter, according to the guidance given to us by the Guardian himself, should by no means be suppressed. In fact such individual interpretation is considered the fruit of man's rational power and conducive to a better understanding of the teachings, provided that no disputes or arguments arise among the friends and the individual himself understands and makes it clear that his views are merely his own. Individual interpretations continually change as one grows in comprehension of the teachings. As Shoghi Effendi explained: "To deepen in the Cause means to read the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh and the Master so thoroughly as to be able to give it to others in its pure form. There are many who have some superficial idea of what the Cause stands for. They, therefore, present it together with all sorts of ideas that are their own. As the Cause is still in its early days we must be most careful lest we fall under this error and injure the Movement we so much adore. There is no limit to the study of the Cause. The more we read the Writings, the more truths we can find in them and the more we will see that our previous notions were erroneous."[10] So, although individual insights can be enlightening and helpful, they can also be misleading. The friends must therefore learn to listen to the views of others without being overawed or allowing their faith to be shaken, and to express their own views without pressing them on their fellow Bahá’ís.


The Covenant―The Cord to which All Must Cling

35.14 The Cause of God is organic, growing and developing like a living being. Time and again it has faced crises which have perplexed the believers, but each time the Cause, impelled by the immutable purpose of God, overcame the crisis and went on to greater heights.

35.15 However great may be our inability to understand the mystery and the implications of the passing of Shoghi Effendi, the strong cord to which all must cling with assurance is the Covenant. The emphatic and vigorous language of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Will and Testament is at this time, as at the time of His own passing, the safeguard of the Cause:

35.16 Unto the Most Holy Book every one must turn and all that is not expressly recorded therein must be referred to the Universal House of Justice. That which this body, whether unanimously or by a majority doth carry, that is verily the truth and the purpose of God Himself. Whose, doth deviate therefrom is verily of them that love discord, hath shown forth malice and turned away from the Lord of the Covenant. . . ." And again: ". . . All must seek guidance and turn unto the Center of the Cause and the House of Justice. And he that turneth unto whatsoever else is indeed in grievous error."[11]

The Universal House Of Justice: Recipient of Divine Guidance

35.17 The Universal House of Justice, which the Guardian said would be regarded by posterity as "the last refuge of a tottering civilization," is now, in the absence of the Guardian, the sole infallibly guided institution in the world to which all must turn, and on it rests the responsibility for ensuring the unity and progress of the Cause of God in accordance with the revealed Word.[12] There are statements from the Master and the Guardian indicating that the Universal House of Justice, in addition to being the Highest Legislative Body of the Faith, is also the body to which all must turn, and is the "apex" of the Bahá’í Administrative Order, as well as the "supreme organ of the Bahá’í Commonwealth."[13] The Guardian has in his writings specified for the House of Justice such fundamental functions as the formulation of future worldwide teaching plans, the conduct of the administrative affairs of the Faith, and the guidance, organization and unification of the affairs of the Cause throughout the world. Furthermore in God Passes By the Guardian makes the following statement: "the Kitáb- i-Aqdas . . . not only preserves for posterity the basic laws and ordinances on which the fabric of His future World Order must rest, but ordains, in addition to the function of interpretation which it confers upon His Successor, the necessary institutions through which the integrity and unity of His Faith can alone be safeguarded."[14] He has also, in "The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh," written that the members of the Universal House of Justice "and not the body of those who either directly or indirectly elect them, have thus been made the recipients of the divine guidance which is at once the lifeblood and ultimate safeguard of this Revelation."[15]

35.18 As the Universal House of Justice has already announced, it cannot legislate to make possible the appointment of a successor to Shoghi Effendi, nor can it legislate to make possible the appointment of any more Hands of the Cause, but it must do everything within its power to ensure the performance of all those functions which it shares with these two mighty Institutions. It must make provision for the proper discharge in future of the functions of protection and propagation, which the administrative bodies share with the Guardianship and the Hands of the Cause; it must, in the absence of the Guardian, receive and disburse the Ḥuqúqu’lláh, in accordance with the following statement of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá: "Disposition of the Ḥuqúq, wholly or partly, is permissible, but this should be done by permission of the authority in the Cause to whom all must turn";[16] it must make provision in its Constitution for the removal of any of its members who commits a sin "injurious to the common weal."[17] Above all, it must, with perfect faith in Bahá’u’lláh, proclaim His Cause and enforce His Law so that the Most Great Peace shall be firmly established in this world and the foundation of the Kingdom of God on earth shall be accomplished.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Pioneering and a Program of Consolidation
5 June 1966

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

36.1 The historic and dazzling accomplishment last year of a feat in pioneering unparalleled in the annals of our Faith should not blind us either to the need of filling the remaining gaps which are still open, or to the ever-present necessity of reinforcing the settled territories with a well-conceived program of consolidation.

36.2 The tasks that lie ahead of us in this particular field of Bahá’í activity are as follows:

As pointed out in the Riḍván Message, the settlement of the minimum number of pioneers called for under last year's goals should be completed. A recent letter has been sent to all National Assemblies responsible for supplying manpower, calling on them to find and dispatch as soon as possible the pioneers to the few remaining territories for which no offers have as yet been received and to expedite the completion of those projects which are in process.
The pioneers who have already settled or are settling in their posts, particularly in virgin and unoccupied territories must be reminded that their movement to their goals is far from being a short stay designed to class a particular territory or island as opened, or label it as having received one or more pioneers, even if, in some cases, new believers native to the land have been enrolled. It is basically and clearly intended to establish the Faith of God securely and firmly in the hearts of people of the area and to ensure that its divinely ordained institutions are understood, adopted and operated by them. The perseverance of the pioneers in their posts, however great the sacrifices involved, is an act of devoted service, which, as attested by our teachings, will have an assured reward in both worlds. The admonitions of the Guardian on this subject are too numerous to cite and amply demonstrate the vital nature of this clear policy.
The pioneers and settlers, as well as the National Assemblies responsible for the administration of the Faith in areas assigned to them, should ever bear in mind that in the initial stages of the establishment of the Faith in any territory, the obscurity surrounding the work of the pioneer or the local Bahá’ís is in itself a protection to the Faith. Patience, tact and wisdom should be exercised. Public attention should not be attracted to the Faith until such time as the believers see the Faith touch more and more of the hearts of receptive souls responding to its Divine Call.
As the numbers fixed last year for settlers in goal areas were minimum figures, each National Assembly should carefully assess the needs of the territories assigned to its jurisdiction. If more pioneers are needed for any of these territories, a full report should at once be sent to the House of Justice, including recommendations as to numbers required and preferred nationalities of the prospective pioneers.
The practical aspects of these pioneering projects are of vital importance. The financial responsibilities assigned under last year's goals do not end because the pioneer has arrived at his post. These responsibilities continue until the objectives are permanently and securely attained. In any case where the National Assembly assigned the responsibility is unable to meet its obligation, application to fill the ascertained need should at once be made to the House of Justice for assistance from the Deputization Fund.
36.3 We assure you of our prayers at the Holy Shrines that the friends in every land may rise above their local and personal problems, realize the needs of the Cause of God at this juncture of its inexorable onward development, and offer on the altar of sacrifice their measure of service and assistance with complete self-abnegation and wholehearted devotion to His infinitely precious Cause.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Message to youth ― three fields of service
10 June 1966

To the Bahá’í youth in every land

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

37.1 In country after country the achievements of Bahá’í youth are increasingly advancing the work of the Nine Year Plan and arousing the admiration of their fellow believers. From the very beginning of the Bahá’í Era, youth have played a vital part in the promulgation of God's Revelation. The Báb Himself was but twenty-five years old when He declared His Mission, while many of the Letters of the Living were even younger. The Master, as a very young man, was called upon to shoulder heavy responsibilities in the service of His Father in Iraq and Turkey, and His brother, the Purest Branch, yielded up his life to God in the Most Great Prison at the age of twenty-two that the servants of God might "be quickened, and all that dwell on earth be united."[1] Shoghi Effendi was a student at Oxford when called to the throne of his guardianship,[2] and many of the Knights of Bahá’u’lláh, who won imperishable fame during the Ten Year Crusade, were young people. Let it, therefore, never be imagined that youth must await their years of maturity before they can render invaluable services to the Cause of God. A time of decision

37.2 For any person, whether Bahá’í or not, his youthful years are those in which he will make many decisions which will set the course of his life. In these years he is most likely to choose his life's work, complete his education, begin to earn his own living, marry and start to raise his own family. Most important of all, it is during this period that the mind is most questing and that the spiritual values that will guide the person's future behaviour are adopted. These factors present Bahá’í youth with their greatest opportunities, their greatest challenges, and their greatest tests―opportunities to truly apprehend the Teachings of their Faith and to give them to their contemporaries, challenges to overcome the pressures of the world and to provide leadership for their and succeeding generations, and tests enabling them to exemplify in their lives the high moral standards set forth in the Bahá’í Writings. Indeed the Guardian wrote of the Bahá’í youth that it is they "who can contribute so decisively to the virility, the purity, and the driving force of the life of the Bahá’í community, and upon whom must depend the future orientation of its destiny, and the complete unfoldment of the potentialities with which God has endowed it."[3]


An Opportunity Unique in Human History

37.3 Those who now are in their teens and twenties are faced with a special challenge and can seize an opportunity that is unique in human history. During the Ten Year Crusade―the ninth part of that majestic process described so vividly by our beloved Guardian―the Community of the Most Great Name spread with the speed of lightning over the major territories and islands of the globe, increased manifoldly its manpower and resources, saw the beginning of the entry of the peoples by troops into the Cause of God, and completed the structure of the Administrative Order of Bahá’u’lláh.[4] Now, firmly established in the world, the Cause, in the opening years of the tenth part of that same process, is perceptibly emerging from the obscurity that has, for the most part, shrouded it since its inception, and is arising to challenge the outworn concepts of a corrupt society and proclaim the solution for the agonizing problems of a disordered humanity. During the lifetime of those who are now young the condition of the world, and the place of the Bahá’í Cause in it, will change immeasurably, for we are entering a highly critical phase in this era of transition.


Three Fields of Service

37.4 Three great fields of service lie open before young Bahá’ís, in which they will simultaneously be remaking the character of human society and preparing themselves for the work that they can undertake later in their lives.

37.5 First, the foundation of all their other accomplishments is their study of the teachings, the spiritualization of their lives and the forming of their characters in accordance with the standards of Bahá’u’lláh. As the moral standards of the people around us collapse and decay, whether of the centuries-old civilizations of the East, the more recent cultures of Christendom and Islam; or of the rapidly changing tribal societies of the world, the Bahá’ís must increasingly stand out as pillars of righteousness and forbearance. The life of a Bahá’í will be characterized by truthfulness and decency; he will walk uprightly among his fellowmen, dependent upon none save God, yet linked by bonds of love and brotherhood with all mankind; he will be entirely detached from the loose standards, the decadent theories, the frenetic experimentation, the desperation of present-day society, will look upon his neighbours with a bright and friendly face and be a beacon light and a haven for all those who would emulate his strength of character and assurance of soul.

37.6 The second field of service, which is linked intimately with the first, is teaching the Faith, particularly to their fellow-youth, among whom are some of the most open and seeking minds in the world. Not yet having acquired all the responsibilities of a family or a long-established home and job, youth can the more easily choose where they will live and study or work. In the world at large young people travel hither and thither seeking amusement, education and experiences. Bahá’í youth, bearing the incomparable treasure of the Word of God for this Day, can harness this mobility into service for mankind and can choose their places of residence, their areas of travel and their types of work with the goal in mind of how they can best serve the Faith.

37.7 The third field of service is the preparation by youth for their later years. It is the obligation of a Bahá’í to educate his children; likewise it is the duty of the children to acquire knowledge of the arts and sciences and to learn a trade or a profession whereby they, in turn, can earn their living and support their families. This, for a Bahá’í youth, is in itself a service to God, a service, moreover, which can be combined with teaching the Faith and often with pioneering. The Bahá’í community will need men and women of many skills and qualifications; for, as it grows in size the sphere of its activities in the life of society will increase and diversify. Let Bahá’í youth, therefore, consider the best ways in which they can use and develop their native abilities for the service of mankind and the Cause of God, whether this be as farmers, teachers, doctors, artisans, musicians or any one of the multitude of livelihoods that are open to them.

37.8 When studying at school or university Bahá’í youth will often find themselves in the unusual and slightly embarrassing position of having a more profound insight into a subject than their instructors. The Teachings of Bahá’u’lláh throw light on so many aspects of human life and knowledge that a Bahá’í must learn, earlier than most, to weigh the information that is given to him rather than to accept it blindly. A Bahá’í has the advantage of the divine Revelation for this Age, which shines like a searchlight on so many problems that baffle modern thinkers; he must therefore develop the ability to learn everything from those around him, showing proper humility before his teachers, but always relating what he hears to the Bahá’í teachings, for they will enable him to sort out the gold from the dross of human error.


Bahá’í Consultation―Tracing New Paths of Human Corporate Action

37.9 Paralleling the growth of his inner life through prayer, meditation, service and study of the teachings, Bahá’í youth have the opportunity to learn in practice the very functioning of the Order of Bahá’u’lláh. Through taking part in conferences and summer schools as well as Nineteen Day Feasts, and in service on committees, they can develop the wonderful skill of Bahá’í consultation, thus tracing new paths of human corporate action. Consultation is no easy skill to learn, requiring as it does the subjugation of all egotism and unruly passions, the cultivation of frankness and freedom of thought as well as courtesy, openness of mind and wholehearted acquiescence in a majority decision. In this field Bahá’í youth may demonstrate the efficiency, the vigor, the access of unity which arise from true consultation and, by contrast, demonstrate the futility of partisanship, lobbying, debate, secret diplomacy and unilateral action which characterize modern affairs. Youth also take part in the life of the Bahá’í community as a whole and promote a society in which all generations―elderly, middle-aged, youth, children―are fully integrated and make up an organic whole. By refusing to carry over the antagonisms and mistrust between the generations which perplex and bedevil modern society they will again demonstrate the heating and life-giving nature of their religion.

37.10 The Nine Year Plan has just entered its third year. The youth have already played a vital part in winning its goals. We now call upon them, with great love and highest hopes and the assurance of our fervent prayers, to consider, individually and in consultation, wherever they live and whatever their circumstances, those steps which they should take now to deepen themselves in their knowledge of the divine message, to develop their characters after the pattern of the Master, to acquire those skills, trades and professions in which they can best serve God and man, to intensify their service to the Cause of Bahá’u’lláh and to radiate its message to the seekers among their contemporaries.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Formation of Three More National Spiritual Assemblies at Riḍván 1967

1 September 1966

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

38.1 JOYFULLY ANNOUNCE FORMATION AT RIḌVÁN 1967 ADDITIONAL NEW NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES BELIZE SEAT BELIZE, LAOS SEAT VIENTIANE, SIKKIM SEAT GANGTOK, CALLING UPON NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES GUATEMALA, THAILAND, INDIA RESPECTIVELY CALL FIRST CONVENTIONS ELECTION NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES. SIKKIM ASSEMBLY SUPPLEMENTARY ACHIEVEMENT NINE YEAR PLAN. CHANGED SITUATION CAMBODIA REQUIRES POSTPONEMENT FORMATION NATIONAL ASSEMBLY THAT COUNTRY. ADDITION ABOVE NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES RAISES TOTAL THROUGHOUT THE WORLD TO EIGHTY-ONE WHOSE MEMBERS WILL PARTICIPATE SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION. OFFERING PRAYERS OF GRATITUDE BAHÁ’U’LLÁH SUPPLICATING DIVINE CONFIRMATIONS EXPANSION CONSOLIDATION THESE TERRITORIES ASSURING SOLID FOUNDATION FUTURE PILLARS UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE.[1]

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Incorporation of the National Spiritual Assembly of Italy
22 December 1966

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

39.1 JOYFULLY ANNOUNCE INCORPORATION ITALIAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SIGNIFICANT MILESTONE PROCESS RECOGNITION FAITH HEART CHRISTENDOM. THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Development of the Bahá’í World Center and the Needs of the Bahá’í International Fund
7 March 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Beloved Friends,

40.1 The time has now come in the progress of the Nine Year Plan when the Bahá’í world must devote a greater effort towards the development of the Faith at its World Center.

40.2 Nearly all the accessible unsettled territories of the Plan have now been Settled, bases have been established throughout the world for the future expansion of the Faith; a program of progressive consolidation is being pursued hand-in-hand with continued expansion; plans for the construction of the Panama Temple are well advanced; the Ḥaẓíratu’l-Quds, Temple sites and endowments called for in the Plan are being steadily acquired; by the end of the next Riḍván period 81 out of the 108 National Spiritual Assemblies called for by 1973 will have been established; and the opening of the period of the proclamation of the Faith is fast approaching.

40.3 Since the Universal House of Justice came into being in 1963, its primary concern at the World Center of the Faith has been with the basic, minimum essentials of undertaking repairs to the Holy Places; establishing its administrative offices; reorganizing the accommodation of pilgrims; gathering its staff, developing a suitable housing program for the Hands of the Cause and their families, the members of the House of Justice and their families, and all other believers serving at the World Center; formulating plans for the expansion of the Gardens and taking the first steps in their initiation; collating the Sacred Texts and the letters of Shoghi Effendi and indexing them; and fostering relations with the Government of the State of Israel and with the United Nations.

40.4 The increased burden which these essential steps have imposed upon the International Fund we have endeavoured to keep at a minimum so that, in the early stages of the Plan, the maximum resources could be utilized in the teaching work throughout the world.

40.5 However, we must now embark upon certain major undertakings vital to the future progress of the Cause. Extensive beautification of the sacred endowments surrounding the Holy Shrines in Bahjí and Haifa, as well as at the site of the future Mashriqu’l-Adhkár on Mount Carmel must be undertaken, both for its own sake and for the protection of these lands which are situated within the boundaries of rapidly expanding cities; the work of classifying and codifying the Holy Texts must be urgently prosecuted; the arrangements for pilgrimage may have to be greatly expanded to provide for the ever-increasing number of applications from East and West; the Intercontinental Conferences and the International Convention must be held and paid for; and the auxiliary institutions of the Universal House of Justice must begin to unfold so that the ever-growing and increasingly complex work of the World Center of the Faith may continue to be efficiently discharged. Moreover, the vital assistance given by the International Fund to the work of the Hands of the Cause and National Spiritual Assemblies must be maintained.

40.6 The minimum budget requirements of the International Fund have nearly doubled since 1963, and if in addition we are to be enabled to undertake these developments, a much greater flow of funds will be needed than is now available.

40.7 We call upon every National Spiritual Assembly to consider now the amount that it can allocate as a contribution to the International Fund in its budget for the coming year. In some cases this may mean that contributions made hitherto will be doubled, trebled, or even more greatly increased. Please write as soon as your decision has been made, and not later than 21 April, telling us the estimated amount of your allocation.

40.8 This is a vitally important matter, and we shall pray in the Holy Shrines that the friends throughout the world will respond wholeheartedly to this call.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Commemoration of the Revelation of the Súriy-i-Mulúk
17 March 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í friends,

41.1 In the 1965 Riḍván Message from the Universal House of Justice we announced that in September 1967, on the Feast of Mashíyyat, a few appointed representatives of the Bahá’í world would visit the site of the House of Bahá’u’lláh in Adrianople where the Súriy-i-Mulúk was revealed. We have decided that the six Hands of the Cause of God who will represent the Universal House of Justice at the Intercontinental Conferences in October are the ones to make this visit. Immediately following this historic act they will proceed to their respective Conferences.[1]

41.2 For the protection of the Faith it is essential that no one, except the Hands, travel to Turkey on this occasion.

41.3 National Spiritual Assemblies are requested to make this announcement at the National Convention this year, and to repeat it in their newsletters and at other times and places as may be appropriate.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Teaching the Masses
11 May 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

43.1 We have recently made a compilation from the writings of the Guardian and from letters written on his behalf regarding the importance and nature of the teaching work among the masses. Attached is a copy of this compilation, which we sincerely recommend to you for your earnest study.[1] The extracts have been arranged chronologically.

43.2 It is our hope and belief that this compilation will guide and assist you in better appreciating the manner of the presentation of the teachings of the Faith; the attitude that must govern those responsible for enrolling new believers; the need to educate the newly enrolled Bahá’ís, to deepen them in the teachings and to wean them gradually away from their old allegiances; the necessity of keeping a proper balance between expansion and consolidation; the significance of the participation of the native believers of each country in the teaching work and in the administration of the affairs of the community; the formulation of budgets within the financial capabilities of the community; the importance of fostering the spirit of self-sacrifice in the hearts of the friends; the worthy goal for each national community to become self-supporting; the preferability of individuality of expression to absolute uniformity, within the framework of the Administrative Order; and the lasting value of dedication and devotion when engaged in the teaching work.

43.3 We are confident that the implementation of these principles as set forth in the writings of the Guardian will aid you in your teaching work.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Sesquicentennial of the Birth of Bahá’u’lláh
25 June 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

44.1 12 November 1967, will mark the 150th anniversary of Bahá’u’lláh's birth. We call the entire Bahá’í world to joyful celebration, befitting an event so momentous to the fortunes of humanity.

44.2 The Universal House of Justice feels that the coincidence of this great occasion with the opening of the proclamation period provides a splendid opportunity for bringing to public attention both the spiritual and social import of the Cause. Not only its message, but the historical fact of a new Revelation, with all its implications of a new and worldwide civilization, should be made clear.

44.3 Let the friends not hesitate to welcome to their observances, even to those of a devotional character, the non-Bahá’í public, many of whom may well be attracted by the prayers and expressions of gratitude of the believers, no less than by the exalted tone of passages from Bahá’í Writings.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/The Nature and Purpose of Proclamation
2 July 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

45.1 In just over three months the period of the worldwide proclamation of the Faith will be opened at the six Intercontinental Conferences called to celebrate the centenary of the revelation of the Súriy-i-Mulúk.[1] Those conferences will provide an opportunity for representatives of the National Spiritual Assemblies to exchange ideas and coordinate plans for the proclamation which will continue throughout the remaining four and a half years of the Plan.

45.2 The stimulating effect of this interchange of ideas will produce greatly increased momentum throughout the world, but inasmuch as many projects must be worked out before that date, we feel a few additional comments on the nature and purpose of proclamation will be helpful now.

45.3 Proclamation comprises a number of activities, of which publicity is only one. The Universal House of Justice itself will be conveying the Message of Bahá’u’lláh to the heads of all states, but, in addition to this, one of the most important duties of each National Spiritual Assembly is to acquaint leaders of thought and prominent men and women in its country with the fundamental aims, the history and the present status and achievements of the Cause. Such an activity must be carried out with the utmost wisdom, discretion and dignity. Publicity connected with such approaches must be weighed very carefully, as it may be unwise or discourteous. This is, of course, a long-range program, for such things cannot be rushed, but it must be given constant attention.

45.4 Another aspect of proclamation is a series of teaching programs designed to reach every stratum of human society―programs that should be pursued diligently and wisely, using every available resource.

45.5 Publicity itself should be well-conceived, dignified and reverent. A flamboyant approach which may succeed in drawing much initial attention to the Cause, may ultimately prove to have produced a revulsion which would require great effort to overcome. The standard of dignity and reverence set by the beloved Guardian should always be upheld, particularly in musical and dramatic items; and photographs of the Master should not be used indiscriminately. This does not mean that activities of the youth, for example, should be stultified; one can be exuberant without being irreverent or undermining the dignity of the Cause.

45.6 Every land has its own conditions, thus the kind of proclamation activity to be followed in each country should be decided by its National Spiritual Assembly. National Spiritual Assemblies need not follow or copy programs initiated in other countries.

45.7 In all proclamation activities, follow-up is of supreme importance. Proclamation, expansion and consolidation are mutually helpful activities which must be carefully interrelated. In some places it is desirable to open a teaching campaign with publicity―in others it is wiser to establish first a solid local community before publicizing the Faith or encouraging contacts with prominent people. Here, again, wisdom is needed.

45.8 We have been elated by the enthusiasm with which the Bahá’í community is preparing for the challenging months and years ahead, and we eagerly await those days but a few short months away which will open a period of such promise for the diffusion of God's Word.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to the Six Intercontinental Conferences
October 1967

To the Six Intercontinental Conferences[1]

Dearly loved Friends,

46.1 On this, the hundredth anniversary of the sounding in Adrianople of the opening notes of Bahá’u’lláh's proclamation to the rulers, leaders and peoples of the world, we recall with profound emotion the circumstances surrounding the Faith of God at that time. In a land termed by Him the "Land of Mystery," the Bearer of God's Revelation had arisen to carry that Faith a stage further in its divinely ordained destiny.[2]

46.2 Internally, the infant Cause of God was convulsed by a crisis from whose shadows emerged the majestic figure of Bahá’u’lláh, the visible Center and Head of a newly established Faith.[3] The first pilgrimages were made to His Residence, a further stage in the transfer of the remains of the Báb was achieved, and above all the first intimations were given of the future station of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá as the Center of the Covenant and of the revelation of the new laws for the New Day. Externally, the full significance of the new Revelation was proclaimed by no one less than its Divine Bearer, His followers began openly to identify themselves with the Most Great Name, the independent character of the Faith became established and its fearless exponents took up their pens in defense of its fair name.[4]

46.3 Now, a hundred years later, the friends gathered in the six Intercontinental Conferences to commemorate the events of the past, privileged to gaze upon the portrait of their Beloved, must consider the urgent needs of the Cause today. As the Bahá’í world enters the third phase of the Nine Year Plan we are called upon to proclaim once again that Divine Message to the leaders and masses of the world, to aid the Faith of God to emerge from obscurity into the arena of public attention, to demonstrate through steadfast adherence to its laws the independent character of its mission and to brace ourselves in preparation for the attacks that are bound to be directed against its victorious onward march. Upon our efforts depends in very large measure the fate of humanity. The hundred years' respite having ended, the struggle between the forces of darkness―man's lower nature―and the rising sun of the Divine teachings which draw him on to his true station, intensifies day by day.

46.4 The Centenary campaign has been opened by the Universal House of Justice presenting to 140 Heads of State a compilation of Bahá’u’lláh's Own proclamation. The friends must now take the Message to the rest of humanity. The time is ripe and the opportunities illimitable. We are not alone nor helpless. Sustained by our love for each other and given power through the Administrative Order―so laboriously erected by our beloved Guardian―the Army of Light can achieve such victories as will astonish posterity.

46.5 We pray at the Holy Shrines that these Intercontinental Conferences will be centers of spiritual illumination inspiring the friends to redouble their efforts in further expanding and consolidating the Faith of God, to arise to fill the remaining pioneer goals, to undertake travelling teaching projects, and to offer generously of their substance to the various funds, particularly to the vital project of erecting the Panama Temple, the foundation stone of which is being laid by Amatu’l-Bahá Rúḥíyyih Khánum during the course of these Conferences.

46.6 As humanity enters the dark heart of this age of transition our course is clear―the achievement of the assigned goals and the proclamation of Bahá’u’lláh's healing Message. It is our ardent hope that from these Conferences valiant souls may arise with noble resolve and in loving service to ensure the successful and early accomplishment of the sacred tasks that lie ahead.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/15 October 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

47.1 The following cable has just been sent to the United States National Spiritual Assembly for publication in Bahá’í News. Please share it with all friends in your jurisdiction.

47.2 HEARTS FILLED PROFOUND GRATITUDE REJOICE ANNOUNCE INAUGURATION THIRD PHASE NINE YEAR PLAN THROUGH SUCCESSFUL CONSUMMATION SIX INTERCONTINENTAL CONFERENCES ATTENDED BY 9,200 BELIEVERS INCLUDING NEARLY ALL HANDS CAUSE LARGE NUMBER BOARD MEMBERS REPRESENTATIVES ALMOST ALL NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES BAHÁ’Í WORLD OVER 140 TERRITORIES AND HOST OF ASIAN AFRICAN AMERINDIAN TRIBES. INESTIMABLE PRIVILEGE CONFERRED PARTICIPANTS THROUGH VIEWING PORTRAIT ABHÁ BEAUTY.[1] SPIRIT HOLY LAND AND ADRIANOPLE CONVEYED SIX DISTINGUISHED REPRESENTATIVES HOUSE JUSTICE. FIRST PRESENTATIONS BEHALF HOUSE JUSTICE PROCLAMATION BOOK HEADS OF STATE MADE BEFORE AND DURING CONFERENCE. FRUITFUL DELIBERATIONS HELD PROCLAMATION EXECUTION REMAINING GOALS PLAN. SOLIDARITY BAHÁ’Í WORLD FURTHER EVINCED THROUGH INGENIOUS SCHEME TELEPHONIC EXCHANGE GREETINGS ALL SIX CONFERENCES. SPIRITUAL POTENCIES THIS NEW PHASE REINFORCED THROUGH FORMAL LAYING BY AMATU’L-BAHÁ OF CORNERSTONE MOTHER TEMPLE LATIN AMERICA. OVER 230 OFFERS MADE AT CONFERENCES JOIN RANKS VALIANT PIONEERS CAUSE. RAISE SUPPLIANT HANDS BAHÁ’U’LLÁH ENDOW FRIENDS EVERY LAND FRESH MEASURE CELESTIAL STRENGTH ENABLE THEM PURSUE WITH INCREASED VISION UNABATED RESOLVE GLORIOUS GOALS AHEAD UNTIL THIS NEW PERIOD PROCLAMATION YIELDS ITS SHARE IN DIVINELY PROPELLED PROCESS ESTABLISHMENT KINGDOM GOD HEARTS MEN.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Announcement of the Resignation of Dr. Luṭfu’lláh Ḥakím from the Universal House of Justice
15 October 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

48.1 After a lifetime of devoted and self-sacrificing service to the Cause of God Dr Luṭfu’lláh Ḥakím has asked the Universal House of Justice to accept his resignation from that Institution because his health and advancing age make it increasingly difficult for him to participate as effectively as he would wish in its work.

48.2 The Universal House of Justice has regretfully accepted Dr Ḥakím's resignation, but in view of the imminence of the next election, has asked him to continue to serve as a member until that time, and Dr Ḥakím has kindly consented to do so.

48.3 Having served the Master Himself in the Holy Land, as well as accompanying Him during His historic visits in England and Scotland, and been intimately associated with Shoghi Effendi in his youth, Dr Ḥakím was called again to the World Center by the beloved Guardian in 1950 for important service at the World Center and was later appointed to the first International Bahá’í Council, of which he was the Eastern Assistant Secretary.[1] He continued to serve on that body and then on the Universal House of Justice with undiminished devotion but with increasing difficulty during the subsequent sixteen years, earning the love and admiration of his co-workers.

48.4 Please share this announcement with the friends in your area.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Assumption by the Universal House of Justice of Representation of the Bahá’í International Community at the United Nations
17 October 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

49.1 MORROW SIX INTERCONTINENTAL CONFERENCES INAUGURATING PROCLAMATION PERIOD ANNOUNCE BAHÁ’Í WORLD SIGNIFICANT STEP DEVELOPMENT RELATIONS UNITED NATIONS THROUGH ASSUMPTION BY UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE FUNCTION REPRESENTATION BAHÁ’Í INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY CAPACITY NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION AT UNITED NATIONS. TAKE THIS OCCASION EXPRESS NATIONAL ASSEMBLY UNITED STATES AND MILDRED MOTTAHEDEH GRATEFUL LOVING APPRECIATION MANY YEARS DEVOTED TIRELESS SUCCESSFUL SERVICES AS REPRESENTATIVE AND OBSERVER RESPECTIVELY.[1]

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/23 October 1967

To National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

50.1 We are happy to share with you the joyous news that the Foundation Stone of the Mother Temple of Latin America has been laid by Amatu’l-Bahá Rúḥíyyih Khánum on behalf of the Universal House of Justice.

50.2 This inaugurates the next phase in the planning and construction of this important edifice which will culminate in the commencement of the erection of the Temple itself in January, 1969. During the current phase the final working plans and specifications will be drafted, bids will be obtained and contracts for construction will be placed. All this will call for funds in ever-increasing amounts.

50.3 We therefore call upon all National Spiritual Assemblies to:

Inform the National Spiritual Assembly of Panama of the amount of your budget allocation for the Panama temple during this year and when they may expect contributions to be received.
Transmit as soon as possible all available funds, either accumulated or earmarked, directly to the National Spiritual Assembly of Panama.
Encourage all Local Spiritual Assemblies and individuals to contribute to this project.


With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Selection of Travelling Teachers
26 October 1967

To National Spiritual Assemblies engaged in mass teaching

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

51.1 We have been watching with keen interest the development of the teaching work among the masses, and from time to time have offered suggestions to guide and assist the efforts of National Spiritual Assemblies engaged in this highly meritorious activity.

51.2 Many National Spiritual Assemblies in carrying out their plans for expansion and consolidation have found it necessary to select a number of believers for service as travelling teachers. While we appreciate the valuable services these travelling teachers have already rendered we are nevertheless deeply conscious of the problems facing your National Assemblies in your desire to carry out your teaching programs with as much dispatch as possible. The purpose of this letter is to draw your attention to the fact that these problems could well be minimized if the selection of such teachers were done with great care and discretion.

51.3 It must be realized that people who are mostly illiterate cannot have the benefit of reading for themselves the written word and of deriving directly from it the spiritual sustenance they need for the enrichment of their Bahá’í lives. They become dependent, therefore, to a large extent on their contacts with visiting teachers. The spiritual calibre or moral quality of these teachers assumes, therefore, great importance. The National Spiritual Assembly or the Teaching Committees responsible for the selection of these teachers should bear in mind that their choice must depend, not only on the knowledge or grasp of the teachings on the part of the teachers, but primarily upon their pure spirit and their true love for the Cause, and their capacity to convey that spirit and love to others.

51.4 We are enclosing some extracts from the Writings which will no doubt assist you in your deliberations on this vital subject.[1] What wonderful results will soon be witnessed in the areas under your jurisdiction if you devise ways and means to ensure, as far as circumstances permit, that the travelling teachers you are encouraging to circulate among the friends will all be of the standard called for in these quotations―pure and sanctified souls, with nothing but true devotion and self-sacrifice motivating them in their services to God's Holy Cause. We also suggest that the study of quotations such as these should form part of the courses offered at your Teaching Institutes for the deepening of the friends.

51.5 We wish to assure you once again of our fervent prayers at the Holy Shrines for the solution of your problems and the removal of all obstacles from the path you are so valiantly pursuing.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Extracts on Teaching the Masses
31 October 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

52.1 We have recently sent to those National Spiritual Assemblies which are engaged in mass teaching the enclosed extracts from the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and from the letters of Shoghi Effendi. We feel that they will also be of great assistance to all other National Spiritual Assemblies.

52.2 The paramount goal of the teaching work at the present time is to carry the message of Bahá’u’lláh to every stratum of human society and every walk of life. An eager response to the teachings will often be found in the most unexpected quarters, and any such response should be quickly followed up, for success in a fertile area awakens a response in those who were at first uninterested.

52.3 The same presentation of the teachings will not appeal to everybody; the method of expression and the approach must be varied in accordance with the outlook and interests of the hearer. An approach which is designed to appeal to everybody will usually result in attracting the middle section, leaving both extremes untouched. No effort must be spared to ensure that the healing Word of God reaches the rich and the poor, the learned and the illiterate, the old and the young, the devout and the atheist, the dweller in the remote hills and islands, the inhabitant of the teeming cities, the suburban businessman, the labourer in the slums, the nomadic tribesman, the farmer, the university student; all must be brought consciously within the teaching plans of the Bahá’í Community.

52.4 Whereas plans must be carefully made, and every useful means adopted in the furtherance of this work, your Assemblies must never let such plans eclipse the shining truth expounded in the enclosed quotations: that it is the purity of heart, detachment, uprightness, devotion and love of the teacher that attracts the divine confirmations and enables him, however ignorant he be in this world's learning, to win the hearts of his fellowmen to the Cause of God.

With loving greetings,

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


Teaching the Masses
Annex
52.5 Whoso ariseth, in this Day, to aid Our Cause, and summoneth to his assistance the hosts of a praiseworthy character and upright conduct, the influence flowing from such an action will, most certainly, be diffused throughout the whole world.

(Bahá’u’lláh, Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh, Rev. ed. [Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1983], sec. 131, p. 287)
52.6 Whoso ariseth to teach Our Cause must needs detach himself from all earthly things, and regard, at all times, the triumph of Our Faith as his supreme objective. . . . And when he determineth to leave his home, for the sake of the Cause of his Lord, let him put his whole trust in God, as the best provision for his journey, and array himself with the robe of virtue. . . .

52.7 If he be kindled with the fire of His love, if he forgoeth all created things, the words he uttereth shall set on fire them that hear him. . . .

(Bahá’u’lláh, Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh, sec. 157, pp. 334-35)
52.8 I swear by Him Who is the Most Great Ocean! Within the very breath of such souls as are pure and sanctified far-reaching potentialities are hidden. So great are these potentialities that they exercise their influence upon all created things.

(Bahá’u’lláh, cited in Shoghi Effendi, The Advent of Divine Justice [Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 19841, p. 23)

52.9 He is the true servant of God, who, in this day, were he to pass through cities of silver and gold, would not deign to look upon them, and whose heart would remain pure and undefiled from whatever things can be seen in this world, be they its goods or its treasures. I swear by the Sun of Truth! The breath of such a man is endowed with potency, and his words with attraction.

(Bahá’u’lláh, cited in Shoghi Effendi, The Advent of Divine Justice, p. 23)
52.10 The most vital duty, in this day, is to purify your characters, to correct your manners, and improve your conduct. The beloved of the Merciful must show forth such character and conduct among His creatures, that the fragrance of their holiness may be shed upon the whole world, and may quicken the dead, inasmuch as the purpose of the Manifestation of God and the dawning of the limitless lights of the Invisible is to educate the souls of men, and refine the character of every living man . . .

(‘Abdu’l-Bahá, cited in Shoghi Effendi, The Advent of Divine Justice, p. 26)
52.11 Whensoever ye behold a person whose entire attention is directed toward the Cause of God; whose only aim is this, to make the Word of God to take effect; who, day and night, with pure intent, is rendering service to the Cause; from whose behaviour not the slightest trace of egotism or private motives is discerned―who, rather, wandereth distracted in the wilderness of the love of God, and drinketh only from the cup of the knowledge of God, and is utterly engrossed in spreading the sweet savours of God, and is enamoured of the holy verses of the Kingdom of God―know ye for a certainty that this individual will be supported and reinforced by heaven; that like unto the morning star, he will forever gleam brightly out of the skies of eternal grace. But if he show the slightest taint of selfish desires and self love, his efforts will lead to nothing and he will be destroyed and left hopeless at the last.

(‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Selections from the Writings of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, [Rev. ed.] [Haifa: Bahá’í World Center, 19821, pp. 71-72)
52.12 The aim is this: The intention of the teacher must be pure, his heart independent, his spirit attracted, his thought at peace, his resolution firm, his magnanimity exalted and in the love of God a shining torch. Should he become as such, his sanctified breath will even affect the rock; otherwise there will be no result whatsoever. As long as a soul is not perfected, how can he efface the defects of others. Unless he is detached from aught else save God, how can he teach severance to others!

(‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Tablets of the Divine Plan: Revealed by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá to the North American Bahá’ís, Rev. ed. [Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1980], p. 51)
52.13 One thing and only one thing will unfailingly and alone secure the undoubted triumph of this sacred Cause, namely the extent to which our own inner life and private character mirror forth in their manifold aspects the splendor of those eternal principles proclaimed by Bahá’u’lláh.

(Shoghi Effendi, from a letter dated 24 September 1924 to the Bahá’ís of America, published in Bahá’í Administration: Selected Messages, 1922-1932 [Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1980], p. 66)
52.14 . . . having attained sufficiently that individual regeneration―the essential requisite of teaching―let us arise to teach His Cause with righteousness, conviction, understanding and vigor. Let this be the paramount and most urgent duty of every Bahá’í. . . .

(Shoghi Effendi, from a letter dated 24 November 1924 to the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States and Canada, published in Bahá’í Administration, p. 67)
52.15 The first and most important qualification of a Bahá’í teacher is, indeed, unqualified loyalty and attachment to the Cause. Knowledge is, of course, essential, but compared to devotion it is secondary in importance.

52.16 What the Cause now requires is not so much a group of highly cultured and intellectual people who can adequately present its Teachings, but a number of devoted, sincere and loyal supporters who, in utter disregard of their own weaknesses and limitations, and with hearts afire with the love of God, forsake their all for the sake of spreading and establishing His Faith. . . .

(From a letter dated 14 November 1935 written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi to the National Teaching Committee of the United States and Canada, published in Bahá’í News, No. 102 [August 1936], p. 2)
52.17 They must remember the glorious history of the Cause, which . . . was established by dedicated souls who, for the most part, were neither rich, famous, nor well educated, but whose devotion, zeal and self-sacrifice overcame every obstacle and won miraculous victories for the Faith of God. . . .

(From a letter dated 29 June 1941 written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi to the National Spiritual Assembly of India and Burma, published in Dawn of a New Day [New Delhi: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, n.d. (1970)], p. 89)
52.18 . . . what raised aloft the banner of Bahá’u’lláh was the love, sacrifice, and devotion of His humble followers and the change that His teachings wrought in their hearts and lives.

(From a letter dated 20 June 1942 written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi to the National Spiritual Assembly of the British Isles, published in Unfolding Destiny, [London: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1981], p. 152)
52.19 It is the quality of devotion and self-sacrifice that brings rewards in the service of this Faith rather than means, ability or financial backing.

(From a letter dated 11 May 1948 written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi to the National Spiritual Assembly of Australia and New Zealand)
52.20 One wise and dedicated soul can so often give life to an inactive community, bring in new people and inspire to greater sacrifice. He hopes that whatever else you are able to do during the coming months, you will be able to keep in circulation a few really good Bahá’í teachers.

(From a letter dated 30 June 1952 written on behalf of Shoghi Effendi to the National Spiritual Assembly of Central America)



/*chapter*/Plans for Commemorating the Sesquicentennial of the Birth of Bahá’u’lláh at the First Oceanic Conference, Palermo, Sicily
12 November 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

53.1 OCCASION HUNDRED FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY BIRTH BLESSED BEAUTY WE CONTEMPLATE WITH HEARTS OVERFLOWING GRATITUDE INESTIMABLE BOUNTIES CONFERRED BY GOD THROUGH HIS SUPREME MANIFESTATION ENSURING FULFILLMENT GLORIOUS LONG PROMISED KINGDOM NOW EVOLVING WOMB TRAVAILING AGE DESTINED CONFER PEACE UNDREAMT FELICITY MANKIND.[1] ANNOUNCE CONVOCATION TWENTY-THIRD TO TWENTY-FIFTH AUGUST 1968 FIRST OCEANIC CONFERENCE BAHÁ’Í WORLD PALERMO SICILY HEART SEA TRAVERSED GOD'S MANIFESTATION CENTURY AGO PROCEEDING INCARCERATION MOST GREAT PRISON.[2] TWOFOLD PURPOSE CONFERENCE CONSIDER MOMENTOUS FULFILLMENT AGE-OLD PROPHECIES TRIUMPH GOD'S MESSENGER OVER EVERY GRIEVOUS CALAMITY AND CONSULT PLANS PROPAGATION CAUSE ISLANDS LANDS BORDERING MEDITERRANEAN SEA. PARTICIPANTS INVITED HOLY LAND IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING CONFERENCE ATTEND COMMEMORATION ARRIVAL LORD HOSTS THESE SACRED SHORES RECONSECRATE THEMSELVES THRESHOLD HIS SHRINE PROSECUTION GLORIOUS TASKS AHEAD.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Safeguarding the Letters of Shoghi Effendi
December 1967

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

54.1 As the friends are already aware, one of the goals of the Nine Year Plan is continued collation and classification of the Bahá’í Sacred Scriptures, as well as the writings of Shoghi Effendi.[1]

54.2 We have already pointed out to the friends on several occasions that the application of Bahá’í laws, the elucidation and extension of basic administrative principles, and the all-important function of legislating on matters not explicitly recorded in our teachings are dependent upon a careful study by the Universal House of Justice of the revealed and pertinent words of Bahá’u’lláh and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, as well as the illuminating interpretations and directions of Shoghi Effendi.

54.3 Through the labors of the beloved Guardian himself, and the collaboration of the National Spiritual Assembly of Persia, great strides have already been taken to collate the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. Even up to the present time, a special National Committee in Persia is assiduously and regularly engaged in classifying the Holy Texts of the Founder of our Faith, and the Center of the Covenant in fulfilment of the goal of the Nine Year Plan referred to above. The writings of the Guardian, however, apart from his general communications already published, which consist to a large extent of letters written by him or on his behalf to various National Spiritual Assemblies, Local Spiritual Assemblies, groups of believers and individual Bahá’ís, have only been partly collated. Although many National Spiritual Assemblies and individual believers have already sent the originals or copies of their letters from the Guardian to the Holy Land, and quite a number of these have been published at different times in Bahá’í News and other news bulletins, it is our confirmed opinion that there are many such letters that have still not been shared with us which may contain a new application of a principle, an already enunciated guideline rephrased to apply in a new situation, a further elucidation of a Bahá’í law, a fresh light thrown on a many-sided issue or some wise counsel in a personal problem.

54.4 Your National Spiritual Assembly is requested, therefore, to check carefully first in its own archives or files of correspondence with the Guardian, for any letters addressed to its body or to its subsidiary institutions, written by Shoghi Effendi or on his behalf, and not yet forwarded to the Holy Land. At the end of this letter we indicate the number and description of Shoghi Effendi's letters falling into this category and pertaining to your area, which we have in our archival files, so that you need to take action in sending us only the text of letters not included in this listing.

54.5 You are also requested to appeal to the friends under your jurisdiction, calling on those who were privileged to have received letters from the Guardian but have not as yet sent their texts to the Holy Land to take immediate steps to do so. In assisting the friends and your National Spiritual Assembly in carrying out this important project we offer the following points for your consideration:

54.5a 1. Recipients of letters from the Guardian have the inherent right of deciding to keep the letters themselves, or to have them preserved for the future in their families. To assist the Universal House of Justice, however, in its efforts to study and compile the letters of the Guardian, the friends are urged to provide, for dispatch to the Holy Land, photostatic copies of their communications from the Guardian if they wish to keep the originals themselves.
54.5b 2. If they are not in a position to provide such copies, they should kindly allow National Spiritual Assemblies to undertake this project on our behalf.
54.5c 3. If facilities for obtaining clear photostatic or Xerox copies are not available in any area, National Spiritual Assemblies are requested to make carefully typed or hand-written copies of such letters, with a certification on behalf of the National Spiritual Assembly concerned that the copies are true and exact.
54.5d 4. Should any believer possess letters so personal and confidential that he does not wish to disclose their contents to any institution other than the Universal House of Justice, he is invited to send either the originals or copies of such letters, marked confidential, directly to the Universal House of Justice, by registered mail, with any instructions he wishes to be followed.
54.6 We hope these guidelines will help you in promoting a project directly linked with the vital functions of the Universal House of Justice. You are free to quote from this letter as you wish, in any appeal you address to the believers.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Relationship of Bahá’ís to Politics
8 December 1967

To an individual believer[1]

Dear Bahá’í Friend,

55.1 . . . we will gladly attempt to clarify some of the points which bewilder you in the relationship of Bahá’ís to politics. This is a matter of very great importance, particularly in these days when the world situation is so confused; an unwise act or statement by a Bahá’í in one country could result in a grave setback for the Faith there or elsewhere―and even loss of the lives of fellow-believers.


Viewing the World's Problems in the Light of God's Purpose for Man

55.2 The whole conduct of a Bahá’í in relation to the problems, sufferings and bewilderment of his fellowmen should be viewed in the light of God's purpose for mankind in this age and the processes He has set in motion for its achievement.

55.3 When Bahá’u’lláh proclaimed His Message to the world in the nineteenth century He made it abundantly clear that the first step essential for the peace and progress of mankind was its unification. As He says, "The well-being of mankind, its peace and security are unattainable unless and until its unity is firmly established." (The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 203) To this day, however, you will find most people take the opposite point of view: they look upon unity as an ultimate almost unattainable goal and concentrate first on remedying all the other ills of mankind. If they did but know it, these other ills are but various symptoms and side effects of the basic disease―disunity.

55.4 Bahá’u’lláh has, furthermore, stated that the revivification of mankind and the curing of all its ills can be achieved only through the instrumentality of His Faith. "The vitality of men's belief in God is dying out in every land; nothing short of His wholesome medicine can ever restore it. The corrosion of ungodliness is eating into the vitals of human society; what else but the Elixir of His potent Revelation can cleanse and revive it?" (Gleanings, XCIX) "That which the Lord hath ordained as the sovereign remedy and mightiest instrument for the healing of all the world is the union of all its peoples in one universal Cause, one common Faith. This can in no wise be achieved except through the power of a skilled, an all-powerful and inspired Physician. This, verily, is the truth, and all else naught but error." (Gleanings, CXX) In similar vein, the beloved Guardian wrote:

55.4a Humanity, whether viewed in the light of man's individual conduct or in the existing relationships between organized communities and nations, has, alas, strayed too far and suffered too great a decline to be redeemed through the unaided efforts of the best among its recognized rulers and statesmen―however disinterested their motives, however concerted their action, however unsparing in their zeal and devotion to its cause. No scheme which the calculations of the highest statesmanship may yet devise, no doctrine which the most distinguished exponents of economic theory may hope to advance, no principle which the most ardent of moralists may strive to inculcate, can provide, in the last resort, adequate foundations upon which the future of a distracted world can be built. No appeal for mutual tolerance which the worldly-wise might raise, however compelling and insistent, can calm its passions or help restore its vigor. Nor would any general scheme of mere organized international cooperation, in whatever sphere of human activity, however ingenious in conception or extensive in scope, succeed in removing the root cause of the evil that has so rudely upset the equilibrium of present-day society. Not even, I venture to assert, would the very act of devising the machinery required for the political and economic unification of the world―a principle that has been increasingly advocated in recent times―provide in itself the antidote against the poison that is steadily undermining the vigor of organized peoples and nations. What else, might we not confidently affirm, but the unreserved acceptance of the Divine Program enunciated, with such simplicity and force as far back as sixty years ago, by Bahá’u’lláh, embodying in its essentials God's divinely appointed scheme for the unification of mankind in this age, coupled with an indomitable conviction in the unfailing efficacy of each and all of its provisions, is eventually capable of withstanding the forces of internal disintegration which, if unchecked, must needs continue to eat into the vitals of a despairing society.
(The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, pp. 33-34)

Two processes at work

55.5 We are told by Shoghi Effendi that two great processes are at work in the world: the great Plan of God, tumultuous in its progress, working through mankind as a whole, tearing down barriers to world unity and forging humankind into a unified body in the fires of suffering and experience. This process will produce in God's due time, the Lesser Peace, the political unification of the world.[2] Mankind at that time can be likened to a body that is unified but without life. The second process, the task of breathing life into this unified body―of creating true unity and spirituality culminating in the Most Great Peace―is that of the Bahá’ís, who are laboring consciously, with detailed instructions and continuing divine guidance, to erect the fabric of the Kingdom of God on earth, into which they call their fellowmen, thus conferring upon them eternal life.[3]

55.6 The working out of God's Major Plan proceeds mysteriously in ways directed by Him alone, but the Minor Plan that He has given us to execute, as our part in His grand design for the redemption of mankind, is clearly delineated.[4] It is to this work that we must devote all our energies, for there is no one else to do it. So vital is this function of the Bahá’ís that Bahá’u’lláh has written: "O friends! Be not careless of the virtues with which ye have been endowed, neither be neglectful of your high destiny. Suffer not your labors to be wasted through the vain imaginations which certain hearts have devised. Ye are the stars of the heaven of understanding, the breeze that stirreth at the break of day, the soft-flowing waters upon which must depend the very life of all men, the letters inscribed upon His sacred scroll. With the utmost unity and in a spirit of perfect fellowship, exert yourselves, that ye may be enabled to achieve that which beseemeth this Day of God." (Gleanings, XCVI)

55.7 Because love for our fellowmen and anguish at their plight are essential parts of a true Bahá’í's life, we are continually drawn to do what we can to help them. It is vitally important that we do so whenever the occasion presents itself, for our actions must say the same thing as our words―but this compassion for our fellows must not be allowed to divert our energies into channels which are ultimately doomed to failure, causing us to neglect the most important and fundamental work of all. There are hundreds of thousands of well-wishers of mankind who devote their lives to works of relief and charity, but a pitiful few to do the work which God Himself most wants done: the spiritual awakening and regeneration of mankind.


Our task―Building Up the Bahá’í System

55.8 It is often through our misguided feeling that we can somehow aid our fellows better by some activity outside the Faith, that Bahá’ís are led to indulge in politics. This is a dangerous delusion. As Shoghi Effendi's secretary wrote on his behalf. "What we Bahá’ís must face is the fact that society is rapidly disintegrating―so rapidly that moral issues which were clear a half century ago are now hopelessly confused, and what is more, thoroughly mixed up with battling political interests. That is why the Bahá’ís must turn all their forces into the channel of building up the Bahá’í Cause and its administration. They can neither change nor help the world in any other way at present. If they become involved in the issues the governments of the world are struggling over, they will be lost. But if they build up the Bahá’í pattern they can offer it as a remedy when all else has failed." (Bahá’í News, No. 241, p. 14) "We must build up our Bahá’í system, and leave the faulty systems of the world to go their own way. We cannot change them through becoming involved in them; on the contrary they will destroy us." (Bahá’í News, No. 215, p. 1)

55.9 Other instructions from the Guardian, covering the same theme in more detail, can be found on pages 24 and 29 to 32 of Principles of Bahá’í Administration (1963 edition); you are no doubt already familiar with these.[5]

55.10 The key to a true understanding of these principles seems to be in these words of Bahá’u’lláh: "O people of God! Do not busy yourselves in your own concerns; let your thoughts be fixed upon that which will rehabilitate the fortunes of mankind and sanctify the hearts and souls of men. This can best be achieved through pure and holy deeds, through a virtuous life and a goodly behavior. Valiant acts will ensure the triumph of this Cause, and a saintly character will reinforce its power. Cleave unto righteousness, O people of Bahá! This, verily, is the commandment which this wronged One hath given unto you, and the first choice of His unrestrained Will for every one of you." (Gleanings, XLIII).

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Election of the Universal House of Justice-Riḍván 1968
22 April 1968

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

56.1 ANNOUNCE BAHÁ’Í WORLD NEWLY ELECTED MEMBERS UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE AMOZ GIBSON ‘ALÍ NAKHJAVÁNÍ HUSHMAND FATHEAZAM IAN SEMPLE CHARLES WOLCOTT DAVID HOFMAN H. BORRAH KAVELIN HUGH CHANCE DAVID RUHE.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to National Conventions―1968
9 May 1968

To all National Bahá’í Conventions

57.1 WITH JOYFUL MEMORY OF DEDICATED SPIRIT MATURE DELIBERATIONS SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION HAIL GOLDEN OPPORTUNITY NATIONAL CONVENTIONS AS CRUCIAL MIDWAY POINT NINE YEAR PLAN APPROACHES GALVANIZE BELIEVERS DIRECT ALL EFFORTS ACHIEVEMENT EVERY REMAINING GOAL AND SIMULTANEOUSLY EXTEND ACCELERATE UNIVERSAL PROCLAMATION DIVINE MESSAGE. WITH UTMOST LOVE CALL UPON ALL BAHÁ’ÍS FOR SACRIFICIAL OUTPOURING ENERGIES RESOURCES ADVANCEMENT REDEEMING ORDER BAHÁ’U’LLÁH SOLE REFUGE MISDIRECTED HEEDLESS MILLIONS. WORLD CENTER FAITH SCENE PROLONGED PRAYERFUL CONSULTATION WITH ASSEMBLED HANDS CAUSE GOALS PLAN INCLUDING FUNDAMENTAL OBJECTIVE DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTION HANDS VIEW EXTENSION FUTURE GOD-GIVEN DUTIES PROTECTION PROPAGATION. SUPPLICATING CONTINUALLY HOLY SHRINES LORD HOSTS BOUNTIFULLY REWARD DEDICATED ARDENT LOVERS COMPLETE GLORIOUS VICTORY.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Announcement of Decision to Establish Eleven Continental Boards of Counselors
21 June 1968

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

58.1 REJOICE ANNOUNCE MOMENTOUS DECISION ESTABLISH ELEVEN CONTINENTAL BOARDS COUNSELLORS PROTECTION PROPAGATION FAITH THREE EACH FOR AFRICA AMERICAS ASIA ONE EACH FOR AUSTRALASIA EUROPE. ADOPTION THIS SIGNIFICANT STEP FOLLOWING CONSULTATION WITH HANDS CAUSE GOD ENSURES EXTENSION FUTURE APPOINTED FUNCTIONS THEIR INSTITUTION. CONTINENTAL BOARDS ENTRUSTED IN CLOSE COLLABORATION HANDS CAUSE WITH RESPONSIBILITY DIRECTION AUXILIARY BOARDS AND CONSULTATION NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES. HANDS CAUSE GOD WILL HENCEFORTH INCREASE INTERCONTINENTAL SERVICES ASSUMING WORLDWIDE ROLE PROTECTION PROPAGATION FAITH. MEMBERS AUXILIARY BOARDS WILL REPORT BE RESPONSIBLE TO CONTINENTAL BOARDS COUNSELLORS. HANDS CAUSE RESIDING HOLY LAND IN ADDITION SERVING LIAISON BETWEEN UNIVERSAL HOUSE JUSTICE AND CONTINENTAL BOARDS COUNSELLORS WILL ASSIST FUTURE ESTABLISHMENT INTERNATIONAL TEACHING CENTER HOLY LAND FORESHADOWED WRITINGS BELOVED GUARDIAN. DETAILS NEW DEVELOPMENTS BEING CONVEYED BY LETTER. FERVENTLY SUPPLICATING HOLY THRESHOLD DIVINE CONFIRMATIONS FURTHER STEP IRRESISTIBLE UNFOLDMENT MIGHTY ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER BAHÁ’U’LLÁH.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Establishment of Continental Boards of Counselors
24 June 1968

To the Bahá’ís of the World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

59.1 The majestic unfoldment of Bahá’u’lláh's world-redeeming administrative system has been marked by the successive establishment of the various institutions and agencies which constitute the framework of that divinely created Order. Thus, more than a quarter of a century after the emergence of the first National Spiritual Assemblies of the Bahá’í world the Institution of the Hands of the Cause of God was formally established, with the appointment by the beloved Guardian, in conformity with the provisions of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Will and Testament, of the first contingent of these high-ranking officers of the Faith. Following the passing of the Guardian of the Cause of God, it fell to the House of Justice to devise a way, within the Administrative Order, of developing "the Institution of the Hands of the Cause with a view to extension into the future of its appointed functions of protection and propagation," and this was made a goal of the Nine Year Plan.[1] Much thought and study has been given to the question over the past four years, and the texts have been collected and reviewed. During the last two months, this goal, as announced in our cable to the National Conventions, has been the object of prolonged and prayerful consultation between the Universal House of Justice and the Hands of the Cause of God. All this made evident the framework within which this goal was to be achieved, namely:

59.1a The Universal House of Justice sees no way in which additional Hands of the Cause of God can be appointed.
59.1b The absence of the Guardian of the Faith brought about an entirely new relationship between the Universal House of Justice and the Hands of the Cause and called for the progressive unfoldment by the Universal House of Justice of the manner in which the Hands of the Cause would carry out their divinely conferred functions of protection and propagation.
59.1c Whatever new development or institution is initiated should come into operation as soon as possible in order to reinforce and supplement the work of the Hands of the Cause while at the same time taking full advantage of the opportunity of having the Hands themselves assist in launching and guiding the new procedures.
59.1d Any such institution must grow and operate in harmony with the principles governing the functioning of the Institution of the Hands of the Cause of God.
59.2 In the light of these considerations the Universal House of Justice decided, as announced in its recent cable, to establish Continental Boards of Counselors for the protection and propagation of the Faith. Their duties will include directing the Auxiliary Boards in their respective areas, consulting and collaborating with National Spiritual Assemblies, and keeping the Hands of the Cause and the Universal House of Justice informed concerning the conditions of the Cause in their areas.

59.3 Initially eleven Boards of Counselors have been appointed, one for each of the following areas: North-western Africa, Central and East Africa, Southern Africa, North America, Central America, South America, Western Asia, Southeastern Asia, Northeastern Asia, Australasia and Europe.

59.4 The members of these Boards of Counselors will serve for a term, or terms, the length of which will be determined and announced at a later date, and while serving in this capacity, will not be eligible for membership on national or local administrative bodies. One member of each Continental Board of Counselors has been designated as Trustee of the Continental Fund for its area.

59.5 The Auxiliary Boards for Protection and Propagation will henceforth report to the Continental Boards of Counselors who will appoint or replace members of the Auxiliary Boards as circumstances may require. Such appointments and replacements as may be necessary in the initial stages will take place after consultation with the Hand or Hands previously assigned to the continent or zone.

59.6 The Hands of the Cause of God have the prerogative and obligation to consult with the Continental Boards of Counselors and National Spiritual Assemblies on any subject which, in their view, affects the interests of the Cause. The Hands residing in the Holy Land will act as liaison between the Universal House of Justice and the Continental Boards of Counselors, and will also assist the Universal House of Justice in setting up, at a propitious time, an international teaching center in the Holy Land, as anticipated in the Guardian's writings.

59.7 The Hands of the Cause of God are one of the most precious assets the Bahá’í world possesses. Released from administration of the Auxiliary Boards, they will be able to concentrate their energies on the more primary responsibilities of general protection and propagation, "PRESERVATION [of the] SPIRITUAL HEALTH [of the] Bahá’í COMMUNITIES" and the "VITALITY [of the] FAITH" of the Bahá’ís throughout the world.[2] The House of Justice will call upon them to undertake special missions on its behalf, to represent it on both Bahá’í and other occasions and to keep it informed of the welfare of the Cause. While the Hands of the Cause will, naturally, have special concern for the affairs of the Cause in the areas in which they reside, they will operate increasingly on an intercontinental level, a factor which will lend tremendous impetus to the diffusion throughout the Bahá’í world of the spiritual inspiration channeled through them―the Chief Stewards of Bahá’u’lláh's embryonic World Commonwealth.

59.8 With joyful hearts we proclaim this further unfoldment of the Administrative Order of Bahá’u’lláh and join our prayers to those of the friends throughout the East and the West that Bahá’u’lláh may continue to shower His confirmations upon the efforts of His servants in the safeguarding and promotion of His Faith.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/First Appointments to Continental Boards of Counselors
24 June 1968

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

60.1 We list below the names of those who have been appointed to the first Continental Boards of Counselors for the Protection and Propagation of the Faith:

Northwestern Africa

Ḥusayn Ardikání (Trustee, Continental Fund), Muḥammad Kebdani, William Maxwell.
Central and East Africa

Oloro Epyeru, Kolonario Oule, Isobel Sabri, Mihdí Samandarí, ‘Azíz Yazdí (Trustee, Continental Fund).
Southern Africa

Seewoosumbur-Jeehoba Appa, Shidan Fat’he-Aazam (Trustee, Continental Fund), Bahíyyih Ford.
North America

Lloyd Gardner, Florence Mayberry, Edna True (Trustee, Continental Fund).
Central America

Carmen de Burafato, Artemus Lamb, Alfred Osborne (Trustee, Continental Fund).
South America

Athos Costas, Hooper Dunbar (Trustee, Continental Fund), Donald Witzel.
Western Asia

Masíḥ Farhangí, Mas‘úd Khamsí, Háḍí Raḥmání (Trustee, Continental Fund), Manúchihr Salmánpúr, Sankaran-Nair Vasudevan.
Southeast Asia

Yan Kee Leong, Khudáraḥm Paymán (Trustee, Continental Fund), Chellie Sundram.
Northeast Asia

Rúḥu’lláh Mumtází (Trustee, Continental Fund), Vicente Samaniego.
Australasia

Suhayl ‘Alá’í, Howard Harwood, Thelma Perks (Trustee, Continental Fund).
Europe

Erik Blumenthal, Dorothy Ferraby (Trustee, Continental Fund), Louis Hénuzet.
60.2 Please share this list with the friends.


With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to First National Youth Conference in the United States
26 June 1968

To the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the United States

61.1 WARMLY ACKNOWLEDGE CONFIDENT JOYOUS MESSAGE FROM BAHÁ’Í YOUTH GATHERED PRECINCTS MOTHER TEMPLE WEST. MOVED THEIR DETERMINATION SEIZE OPPORTUNITIES SERVE BELOVED FAITH CALL ON THEM BOLDLY CHALLENGE INVITE CONFUSED CONTEMPORARIES ENTRAPPED MORASS MATERIALISM TO EXAMINE PARTAKE LIFEGIVING POWER CAUSE JOIN ARMY BAHÁ’U’LLÁH CONFRONT NEGATIVE FORCES OF A SOCIETY SADLY LACKING SPIRITUAL VALUES. ASSURE YOUTH ARDENT PRAYERS HOLY SHRINES GUIDANCE CONFIRMATION THEIR COURAGEOUS EFFORTS.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Hermann Grossmann
9 July 1968

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

62.1 DEEPLY REGRET ANNOUNCE PASSING HAND CAUSE HERMANN GROSSMANN.[1] GREATLY ADMIRED BELOVED GUARDIAN HIS GRIEVOUS LOSS DEPRIVES COMPANY HANDS CAUSE OUTSTANDING COLLABORATOR AND BAHÁ’Í WORLD COMMUNITY STAUNCH DEFENDER PROMOTER FAITH. HIS COURAGEOUS LOYALTY DURING CHALLENGING YEARS TESTS PERSECUTIONS GERMANY OUTSTANDING SERVICES SOUTH AMERICA IMMORTALIZED ANNALS FAITH. INVITE ALL NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES HOLD MEMORIAL GATHERINGS BEFITTING HIS EXALTED RANK EXEMPLARY SERVICES. REQUEST THOSE RESPONSIBLE MOTHER TEMPLES ARRANGE SERVICES AUDITORIUM.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to the First Oceanic Conference, Palermo, Sicily
August 1968

To the Hands of the Cause of God and the Bahá’í friends assembled in, Palermo, Sicily, at the First Bahá’í Oceanic Conference

Dearly loved Friends,

63.1 The event which we commemorate at this first Bahá’í Oceanic Conference is unique. Neither the migration of Abraham from Ur of the Chaldees to the region of Aleppo, nor the journey of Moses towards the Promised Land, nor the flight into Egypt of Mary and Joseph with the infant Jesus, nor yet the Hegira of Muḥammad can compare with the voyage made by God's Supreme Manifestation one hundred years ago from Gallipoli to the Most Great Prison.[1] Bahá’u’lláh's voyage was forced upon Him by the two despots who were His chief adversaries in a determined attempt to extirpate once and for all His Cause, and the decree of His fourth banishment came when the tide of His prophetic utterance was in full flood.[2] The proclamation of His Message to mankind had begun; the sun of His majesty had reached its zenith and, as attested by the devotion of His followers, the respect of the population and the esteem of officials and the representatives of foreign powers, His ascendancy had become manifest. At such a time He was confronted with the decree of final exile to a remote, obscure and pestilential outpost of the decrepit Turkish empire.

63.2 Bahá’u’lláh knew, better than His royal persecutors, the magnitude of the crisis, with all its potentiality for disaster, which confronted Him. Consigned to a prison cell, debarred from access to those to whom His Message must be addressed, cut off from His followers save for the handful who were to accompany Him, and deprived even of association with them, it was apparent that by all earthly standards the ship of His Cause must founder, His mission wither and die.

63.3 But it was the Lord of Hosts with Whom they were dealing. Knowing the sufferings which faced Him His one thought was to instill confidence and fortitude into His followers, to whom He immediately dispatched sublime Tablets asserting the power of His Cause to overcome all opposition. "Should they attempt to conceal its light on the continent," is one of His powerful utterances on this theme, "it will assuredly rear its head in the midmost heart of the ocean, and, raising its voice, proclaim 'I am the life-giver of the world!'"[3] All the afflictions which men could heap upon Him were thrown back from the rock of His adamantine will like spray from the ocean. His patient submission to the affronts of men, His fortitude, His divine genius transformed the somber notes of disaster into the diapason of triumph. At the nadir of His worldly fortunes He raised His standard of victory above the Prison City and poured forth upon mankind the healing balm of His laws and ordinances revealed in His Most Holy Book.[4] "Until our time," comments ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, "no such thing has ever occurred."[5]

Our Part―Building Bahá’u’lláh's Order

63.4 Contemplating this awe-inspiring, supernal episode, we may obtain a clearer understanding of our own times, a more confident view of their outcome and a deeper apprehension of the part we are called upon to play. That the violent disruption which has seized the entire planet is beyond the ability of men to assuage, unaided by God's revelation, is a truth repeatedly and forcibly set forth in our Writings. The old order cannot be repaired; it is being rolled up before our eyes. The moral decay and disorder convulsing human society must run their course; we can neither arrest nor divert them.

63.5 Our task is to build the Order of Bahá’u’lláh. Undeflected by the desperate expedients of those who seek to subdue the storm convulsing human life by political, economic, social or educational programs, let us, with single-minded devotion and concentrating all our efforts on our objective, raise His Divine System and sheltered within its impregnable stronghold, safe from the darts of doubtfulness, demonstrate the Bahá’í way of life. Wherever a Bahá’í community exists, whether large or small, let it be distinguished for its abiding sense of security and faith, its high standard of rectitude, its complete freedom from all forms of prejudice, the spirit of love among its members and for the closely knit fabric of its social life. The acute distinction between this and present-day society will inevitably arouse the interest of the more enlightened, and as the world's gloom deepens the light of Bahá’í life will shine brighter and brighter until its brilliance must eventually attract the disillusioned masses and cause them to enter the haven of the Covenant of Bahá’u’lláh, Who alone can bring them peace and justice and an ordered life.

The Mediterranean―Past History and Spiritual Potential

63.6 The great sea, on one of whose chief islands you are now gathered, within whose hinterland and islands have flourished the Jewish, the Christian and Islamic civilizations is a befitting scene for the first Oceanic Bahá’í Conference. Two millenniums ago, in this arena, the disciples of Christ performed such deeds of heroism and self-sacrifice as are remembered to this day and are forever enshrined in the annals of His Cause. A thousand years later the lands, bordering the southern and western shores of this sea witnessed the glory of Islam's Golden Age.[6]

63.7 In the day of the Promised One this same sea achieved eternal fame through its association with the Heroic and Formative Ages of His Cause. It bore upon its bosom the King of kings Himself, the Center of His Covenant crossed and re-crossed it in the course of His epoch-making journeys to the West, during which He left the indelible imprint of His presence upon European and African lands; the Sign of God on earth frequently journeyed upon it.[7] It enshrines within its depths the mortal remains of the Hand of the Cause of God Dorothy Baker and around its shores lies the dust of apostles, martyrs and pioneers. Forty-six Knights of Bahá’u’lláh are identified with seven of its islands and five of its territories. Through such and many other episodes, Mediterranean lands―ancient home of civilizations―have been endowed with spiritual potentiality to dissolve the encrustations of those once glorious but now moribund social orders and to radiate once again the light of Divine guidance.

63.8 Through dedicated, heroic and sacrificial deeds during the course of the beloved Guardian's ministry, the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh was established in this area. Eight pillars of the Universal House of Justice were raised, the first of an even larger number to be established now and during the course of future plans, to include, as envisioned by Shoghi Effendi, National Spiritual Assemblies in major islands of that historic sea.

The Need for a Dramatic Upsurge in Effective Teaching

63.9 The timing of such exciting developments is dependent upon the outcome of the Nine Year Plan. At this midway point of that Plan, although great strides have been made, more than half the goals are still to be won. The greatest deficiencies are in the opening of new centers where Bahá’ís reside and the formation of Local Spiritual Assemblies, which inevitably affects the ability to establish National Spiritual Assemblies. A dramatic upsurge of teaching―effective teaching―is necessary to make up the leeway; pioneers are needed, teachers must travel, funds must be provided. It is our hope that there will be engendered at this Conference, through your enthusiasm, prayers and spirit of devotion, a great spiritual dynamic to reinforce that grand momentum which, mounting steadily during the next four years, must carry the community of the Most Great Name to overwhelming victory in 1973.

63.10 Dear friends, within a few short days the observance of the Centenary of Bahá’u’lláh's arrival in the Holy Land will take place. The hearts and minds of the entire Bahá’í world will be focused on the Most Holy Shrine, where those privileged to attend this commemoration will circumambulate that Holy Spot and raise their prayers to the Lord of the Age.[8] Let them remember their fellow-believers at home and supplicate from the depths of their souls for such bounties and favors to descend upon the friends of God everywhere as to cause them to rise as one man to demonstrate their love for Him Who suffered for them, by such deeds of sacrifice and devotion as shall outshine the deeds of the past and sweep away every obstacle from the onward march of the Cause of God.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Passing of Dr. Luṭfu’lláh Ḥakím, Member of the Universal House of Justice
12 August 1968

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

64.1 We share with you the following cable which we have just sent to the National Spiritual Assembly of Persia:

GRIEVE ANNOUNCE PASSING LUṬFU’LLÁH ḤAKÍM DEDICATED SERVANT CAUSE GOD.[1] SPECIAL MISSIONS ENTRUSTED HIM FULL CONFIDENCE REPOSED IN HIM BY MASTER AND GUARDIAN HIS CLOSE ASSOCIATION WITH EARLY DISTINGUISHED BELIEVERS EAST WEST INCLUDING HIS COLLABORATION ESSLEMONT HIS SERVICES PERSIA BRITISH ISLES HOLY LAND HIS MEMBERSHIP APPOINTED AND ELECTED INTERNATIONAL BAHÁ’Í COUNCIL HIS ELECTION UNIVERSAL HOUSE JUSTICE WILL ALWAYS BE REMEMBERED IMMORTAL ANNALS FAITH BAHÁ’U’LLÁH. INFORM BELIEVERS HOLD BEFITTING MEMORIAL MEETINGS ALL CENTERS. CONVEY ALL MEMBERS HIS FAMILY EXPRESSIONS LOVING SYMPATHY ASSURANCE PRAYERS PROGRESS HIS RADIANT SOUL ABHÁ KINGDOM.

64.2 In view of Dr Ḥakím's long and devoted record of services to the Faith other National Spiritual Assemblies are requested to hold memorial gatherings. Special commemorative services should also be held in the four Mother Temples of the Bahá’í World.[2]

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Ṭaráẓu’lláh Samandarí
4 September 1968

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

65.1 WITH SORROWFUL HEARTS ANNOUNCE PASSING HAND CAUSE GOD SHIELD HIS FAITH DEARLY LOVED ṬARÁẒU’LLÁH SAMANDARÍ NINETY-THIRD YEAR HIS LIFE ON MORROW COMMEMORATION CENTENARY BAHÁ’U’LLÁH'S ARRIVAL HOLY LAND.[1] FAITHFUL TO LAST BREATH INSTRUCTIONS HIS LORD HIS MASTER HIS GUARDIAN HE CONTINUED SELFLESS DEVOTED SERVICE UNABATED UNTIL FALLING ILL DURING RECENT TEACHING MISSION. UNMINDFUL ILLNESS HE PROCEEDED HOLY LAND PARTICIPATE CENTENARY. EVER REMEMBERED HEARTS BELIEVERS EAST WEST TO WHOSE LANDS HE TRAVELED BEARING MESSAGE HIS LORD WHOSE COMMUNITIES HE FAITHFULLY SERVED THIS PRECIOUS REMNANT HEROIC AGE WHO ATTAINED PRESENCE BLESSED BEAUTY YEAR HIS ASCENSION NOW LAID REST FOOT MOUNTAIN GOD AMIDST THRONG BELIEVERS ASSEMBLED VICINITY VERY SPOT BAHÁ’U’LLÁH FIRST TROD THESE SACRED SHORES. REQUEST ALL NATIONAL ASSEMBLIES HOLD MEMORIAL SERVICES INCLUDING FOUR MOTHER TEMPLES BAHÁ’Í WORLD BEFITTING LONG LIFE DEDICATED EXEMPLARY SERVICE LORD HOSTS BY ONE ASSURED CENTER COVENANT LOVING WELCOME PRESENCE BAHÁ’U’LLÁH ABHa KINGDOM.[2] EXTEND LOVING SYMPATHY ASSURANCE PRAYERS MEMBERS DISTINGUISHED FAMILY.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Results of the Palermo Conference
8 September 1968

To the Bahá’ís of the World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

66.1 The glorious Conference in Palermo concluded with a burst of eager enthusiasm of determined and dedicated believers who have pledged to do their part in winning the remaining goals of the Nine Year Plan. More than 125 offered to pioneer and more than 100 volunteered to do travel teaching. In addition, there was a generous outpouring of material resources to finance teaching projects. Had the entire Bahá’í world been able to participate in the Mediterranean Conference we have no doubt that all the goals would be quickly won.

66.2 With this in mind we wish to impress upon the friends who could not attend the Conference, and who will surely―through reports and personal contact with those who did―sense the enthusiasm generated there, that all believers have the privilege to share in the pioneering work, in the travel teaching program and in contributing to the Fund.

66.3 We announced at the Conference that the International Deputization Fund, so far used to aid pioneering and travel teaching on an international level, will henceforth be available to assist such projects on the national level in those areas where support is vitally important to the winning of the goals of the Nine Year Plan. We are concerned that, although we are now approaching the midway point of the Plan we must yet form an additional 6,997 Local Spiritual Assemblies (76% of the goal), and take the Faith to over 22,800 new localities (59% of the goal). Obviously, hundreds of pioneers and travelling teachers will be required, many of whom will serve in their own countries.

66.4 Those who cannot pioneer or do travel teaching will want to participate by contributing to the International Deputization Fund. Let them remember Bahá’u’lláh's injunction: "Center your energies in the propagation of the Faith of God. Whoso is worthy of so high a calling, let him arise and promote it. Whoso is unable, it is his duty to appoint him who will, in his stead, proclaim this Revelation . . ."[1] Let the Bahá’ís of the world join in the true spirit of universal participation and win all the victories while there is yet time. Let each assume his full measure of responsibility that all may share the laurels of accomplishment at the end of the Plan.

66.5 Our fervent prayer is that this one-hundredth anniversary of the final banishment of Bahá’u’lláh will mark a significant turning-point in the fortunes of the Nine Year Plan.[2]

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Letter to Youth―Pioneering and Education
9 October 1968

To the Bahá’í youth in every land

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

67.1 In the two years since we last addressed the youth of the Bahá’í world many remarkable advances have been made in the fortunes of the Faith. Not the least of these is the enrollment under the banner of Bahá’u’lláh of a growing army of young men and women eager to serve His Cause. The zeal, the enthusiasm, the steadfastness and the devotion of the youth in every land has brought great joy and assurance to our hearts.

67.2 During the last days of August and the first days of September, when nearly two thousand believers from all over the world gathered in the Holy Land to commemorate the Centenary of Bahá’u’lláh's arrival on these sacred shores, we had an opportunity to observe at first hand those qualities of good character, selfless service and determined effort exemplified in the youth who served as volunteer helpers, and we wish to express our gratitude for their loving assistance and for their example.

67.3 Many of them offered to pioneer, but one perplexing question recurred: Shall I continue my education, or should I pioneer, now? Undoubtedly this same question is in the mind of every young Bahá’í wishing to dedicate his life to the advancement of the Faith. There is no stock answer which applies to all situations; the beloved Guardian gave different answers to different individuals on this question. Obviously circumstances vary with each individual case. Each individual must decide how he can best serve the Cause. In making this decision, it will be helpful to weigh the following factors:

67.3a Upon becoming a Bahá’í ones whole life is, or should become devoted to the progress of the Cause of God, and every talent or faculty he possesses is ultimately committed to this overriding life objective. Within this framework he must consider, among other things, whether by continuing his education now he can be a more effective pioneer later, or alternatively whether the urgent need for pioneers, while possibilities for teaching are still open, outweighs an anticipated increase in effectiveness. This is not an easy decision, since oftentimes the spirit which prompts the pioneering offer is more important than one's academic attainments.
67.3b One's liability for military service may be a factor in timing the offer of pioneer service.
67.3c One may have outstanding obligations to others, including those who may be dependent on him for support.
67.3d It may be possible to combine a pioneer project with a continuing educational program. Consideration may also be given to the possibility that a pioneering experience, even though it interrupts the formal educational program, may prove beneficial in the long run in that studies would later be resumed with a more mature outlook.
67.3e The urgency of a particular goal which one is especially qualified to fill and for which there are no other offers.
67.3f The fact that the need for pioneers will undoubtedly be with us for many generations to come, and that therefore there will be many calls in future for pioneering service.
67.3g The principle of consultation also applies. One may have the obligation to consult others, such as one's parents, one's Local and National Assemblies, and the pioneering committees.
67.3h Finally, bearing in mind the principle of sacrificial service and the unfailing promises Bahá’u’lláh ordained for those who arise to serve His Cause, one should pray and meditate on what his course of action will be. Indeed, it often happens that the answer will be found in no other way.
67.4 We assure the youth that we are mindful of the many important decisions they must make as they tread the path of service to Bahá’u’lláh. We will offer our ardent supplications at the Holy Threshold that all will be divinely guided and that they will attract the blessings of the All-Merciful.

Deepest Bahá’í love,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Guidance on Self-Defense

26 May 1969

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Canada

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

69.1 We have reviewed your letter of 11 April, asking about the teachings of the Faith on self-defence and any guidance on individual conduct in the face of increasing civil disorder in North American cities.

69.2 From the texts you already have available it is clear that Bahá’u’lláh has stated that it is preferable to be killed in the path of God's good pleasure than to kill, and that organized religious attack against Bahá’ís should never turn into any kind of warfare, as this is strictly prohibited in our Writings.

69.3 A hitherto untranslated Tablet from ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, however, points out that in the case of attack by robbers and highwaymen, a Bahá’í should not surrender himself, but should try, as far as circumstances permit, to defend himself, and later on lodge a complaint with the government authorities. In a letter written on behalf of the Guardian, he also indicates that in an emergency when there is no legal force at hand to appeal to, a Bahá’í is justified in defending his life. In another letter the Guardian has further pointed out that the assault of an irresponsible assailant upon a Bahá’í should be resisted by the Bahá’í, who would be justified, under such circumstances, in protecting his life.

69.4 The House of Justice does not wish at the present time to go beyond the guidelines given in the above-mentioned statements. The question is basically a matter of conscience, and in each case the Bahá’í involved must use his judgement in determining when to stop in self-defence lest his action deteriorate into retaliation.

69.5 Of course the above principles apply also in cases when a Bahá’í finds himself involved in situations of civil disorder. We have, however, advised the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States that under the present circumstances in that country it is preferable that Bahá’ís do not buy nor own arms for their protection or the protection of their families.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/New Appointments to Continental Boards of Counselors
10 July 1969

To National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

70.1 With great joy we announce that we have decided to increase the total number of members of the Continental Boards of Counselors for the Protection and Propagation of the Faith to thirty-eight by adding John McHenry III to the Continental Board of Counselors in North East Asia and Mas‘úd Khamsí to the Continental Board of Counselors in South America, raising the number of Counselors on each Board to three and four, respectively.

70.2 We also rejoice to announce the appointment of Mrs Shirin Boman to the Continental Board of Counselors of Western Asia to fill a vacancy on that Board.

70.3 The devoted efforts of all eleven Continental Boards of Counselors during the first year of their service to the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh have been most exemplary and praiseworthy. We are deeply grateful for the loyalty, steadfastness and devotion which have characterized the activities of all members in reinforcing the vitally important work of the Hands of the Cause of God.

70.4 Please share these glad tidings with the friends.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Formation of an Additional National Spiritual Assembly during Riḍván 1970
11 August 1969

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

71.1 In the brief space of time following the announcement of the formation of six new National Spiritual Assemblies in Africa next Riḍván, the succession of victories, resulting from the prodigious efforts exerted by the devoted friends, impels us to announce that a seventh National Spiritual Assembly will be formed in Africa at Riḍván, 1970. The new National Spiritual Assembly including Congo (Brazzaville), Chad, Central African Republic and Gabon, will have its seat in Bangui. This will leave Uganda with its own separate National Spiritual Assembly.

71.2 Please share this joyous news with the believers. We know the friends throughout the world join us in our supplications for the continued, uninterrupted prosecution and speedy fulfillment of the goals, terminating in the ultimate triumph of the Cause of Bahá’u’lláh.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Work of Continental Boards of Counselors and Their Auxiliary Board Members
1 October 1969

To the Continental Boards of Counselors and National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

72.1 A number of questions have been raised concerning the work of the Counselors and Auxiliary Board members, and it has been suggested that Auxiliary Board members be permitted to work regularly with National Spiritual Assemblies and national committees. We have carefully considered again the various factors involved and have decided that we must uphold the principle that such direct consultations should be exceptional rather than the rule. Spiritual Assemblies and Auxiliary Board Members: A Clarification of Roles

72.2 It is the responsibility of Spiritual Assemblies, assisted by their committees, to organize and direct the teaching work, and in doing so they must, naturally, also do all they can to stimulate and inspire the friends. It is, however, inevitable that the Assemblies and committees, being burdened with the administration of the teaching work as well as with all other aspects of Bahá’í community life, will be unable to spend as much time as they would wish on stimulating the believers.

72.3 Authority and direction flow from the Assemblies, whereas the power to accomplish the tasks resides primarily in the entire body of the believers. It is the principal task of the Auxiliary Boards to assist in arousing and releasing this power. This is a vital activity, and if they are to be able to perform it adequately they must avoid becoming involved in the work of administration. For example, when Auxiliary Board members arouse believers to pioneer, any believer who expresses his desire to do so should be referred to the appropriate committee which will then organize the project. Counselors and Auxiliary Board members should not, themselves, organize pioneering or travel teaching projects. Thus it is seen that the Auxiliary Boards should work closely with the grass roots of the community: the individual believers, groups and Local Spiritual Assemblies, advising, stimulating and assisting them. The Counselors are responsible for stimulating, counselling and assisting National Spiritual Assemblies, and also work with individuals, groups and Local Assemblies.

72.4 It is always possible, of course, for Counselors to depute an Auxiliary Board member to meet with a National Spiritual Assembly for a particular purpose, but this should not become a regular practice. Similarly, if the National Spiritual Assembly agrees, it may be advisable for an Auxiliary Board member to meet occasionally with a national committee to clarify the situation in the area and share information and ideas thoroughly. But this also should not become regular. Were it to do so there would be grave danger of inhibiting the proper working of these two institutions, vitiating and undermining the collaboration that must essentially exist between the Continental Boards of Counselors and National Spiritual Assemblies. It would diffuse the energies and time of the Auxiliary Board members through their becoming involved in the administration of teaching. It could lead to the Auxiliary Board member's gradually taking over the direction of the national committee, usurping the function of the National Assembly, or to his becoming merely a travelling teacher sent hither and thither at the direction of the committee or National Assembly.


Sharing Information, Reports, and Recommendations

72.5 It is, of course vital that information be shared fully and promptly, as has been explained in the compilation on the work of Auxiliary Board members that was circulated on 25 March 1969. The ways of ensuring this should be worked out by the Counselors and National Spiritual Assemblies and methods may vary from area to area.

72.6 Reports and recommendations for action, however, are quite different. Auxiliary Board members should send theirs to the Counselors and not, to National Assemblies or national committees directly. It is possible that the Counselors may reject or modify the recommendation; or, if they accept it and pass it on to the National Spiritual Assembly, the National Assembly may decide to refuse it. For an Auxiliary Board member to make recommendations directly to a national committee would lose the benefit of knowledge and experience in a wider field than that of which the Auxiliary Board member is aware, and would short-circuit and undermine the authority of both the Counselors and the National Assembly.


Advice―The Province of Counselors and Auxiliary Board

72.7 Similarly, although an Auxiliary Board member can and should receive information from the National Assemblies and national committees, his primary source of information about the community should be his own direct contacts with Local Spiritual Assemblies, groups and individual believers. In this way the Counselors as well as the National Spiritual Assemblies have the benefit of two independent sources of information about the community: through the Auxiliary Board members on the one hand, and through the national committees on the other.

72.8 Assemblies sometimes misunderstand what is meant by the statement that Counselors and Auxiliary Board members are concerned with the teaching work and not with administration. It is taken to mean that they may not give advice on administrative matters. This is quite wrong. One of the things that Counselors and Auxiliary Board members should watch and report on is the proper working of administrative institutions. The statement that they do not have anything to do with administration means, simply, that they do not administer. They do not direct or organize the teaching work nor do they adjudicate in matters of personal conflict or personal problems. All these activities fall within the sphere of responsibility of the Spiritual Assemblies. But if an Auxiliary Board member finds a Local Spiritual Assembly functioning incorrectly he should call its attention to the appropriate Texts; likewise if, in his work with the community, an Auxiliary Board member finds that the teaching work is being held up by inefficiency of national committees, he should report this in detail to the Counselors who will then decide whether to refer it to the National Spiritual Assembly concerned. Similarly, if the Counselors find that a National Spiritual Assembly is not functioning properly, they should not hesitate to consult with the National Spiritual Assembly about this in a frank and loving way.

72.9 It is the Spiritual Assemblies who plan and direct the work, but these plans should be well known to the Counselors and Auxiliary Board members, because one of the ways in which they can assist the Assemblies is by urging the believers continually to support the plans of the Assemblies. If a National Spiritual Assembly has adopted one goal as pre-eminent in a year, the Auxiliary Board members should bear this in mind in all their contacts with the believers and should direct their attention to the plans of the National Assembly, and stimulate them to enthusiastically support them.

72.10 The Counselors in each continental zone have wide latitude in the carrying out of their work. Likewise they should give to each Auxiliary Board member considerable freedom of action within his own allocated area. Although the Counselors should regularly direct the work of the Auxiliary Board members, the latter should realize that they need not wait for direction; the nature of their work is such that they should be continually engaged in it according to their own best judgement, even if they are given no specific tasks to perform. Above all the Auxiliary Board members should build up a warm and loving relationship between themselves and the believers in their area so that the Local Spiritual Assemblies will spontaneously turn to them for advice and assistance.

72.11 We assure you all of our fervent prayers in the Holy Shrines for the blessings of Bahá’u’lláh upon the strenuous and highly meritorious services that you are performing with such devotion in His path.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Appeal to Increase Teaching Efforts amidst Catastrophic Events of the Day
16 November 1969

To the Bahá’ís of the World

Dear Friends,

73.1 In the worsening world situation, fraught with pain of war, violence and the sudden uprooting of long-established institutions, can be seen the fulfillment of the prophecies of Bahá’u’lláh and the oft-repeated warnings of the Master and the beloved Guardian about the inevitable fate of a lamentably defective social system, an unenlightened leadership and a rebellious and unbelieving humanity.[1] Governments and peoples of both the developed and developing nations, and other human institutions, secular and religious, finding themselves helpless to reverse the trend of the catastrophic events of the day, stand bewildered and overpowered by the magnitude and complexity of the problems facing them. At this fateful hour in human history many, unfortunately, seem content to stand aside and wring their hands in despair or else join in the babel of shouting and protestation which loudly objects, but offers no solution to the woes and afflictions plaguing our age.

73.2 Nevertheless a greater and greater number of thoughtful and fair-minded men and women are recognizing in the clamor of contention, grief and destruction, now reaching such horrendous proportions, the evidences of Divine chastisement, and turning their faces towards God are becoming increasingly receptive to His Word. Doubtless the present circumstances, though tragic and awful in their immediate consequences, are serving to sharpen the focus on the indispensability of the Teachings of Bahá’u’lláh to the needs of the present age, and will provide many opportunities to reach countless waiting souls, hungry and thirsty for Divine guidance.

73.3 It is these opportunities which we must seize before it is too late. What is needed now is the awakening of all believers to the immediacy of the challenge so that each may assume his share of the responsibility for taking the Teachings to all humanity. Universal participation, a salient objective of the Nine Year Plan, must be pressed toward attainment in every continent, country and island of the globe. Every Bahá’í, however humble or inarticulate, must become intent on fulfilling his role as a bearer of the Divine Message. Indeed, how can a true believer remain silent while around us men cry out in anguish for truth, love and unity to descend upon this world?

73.4 We all know how often the Master and the beloved Guardian called upon the friends to consciously strive to be more loving, more united, more dedicated and prayerful than ever before in order to overcome the atmosphere of present-day society which is unloving, disunited, careless of right and wrong and heedless of God. ". . . when we see the increasing darkness in the world today," the Guardian's secretary wrote on his behalf, "we can fully realize that unless the Message of Bahá’u’lláh reaches into the hearts of men and transforms them, there can be no peace and no spiritual progress in the future."[2]


The Necessity of Individual Teaching Goals

73.5 The Nine Year Plan is the current stage in the achievement of that sublime objective. It is now imperative for every Bahá’í to set for himself individual teaching goals. The admonition of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá to lead at least one new soul to the Faith each year and the exhortation of Shoghi Effendi to hold a Bahá’í fireside in one's home every Bahá’í month are examples of individual goals. Many have capacities to do even more, but this alone will assure final and complete victory for the Plan.

73.6 We call upon the friends to join with us in prayer during the Feast of Sultan that we will all become so imbued with zeal, courage and enthusiasm that from this day to the end of the Nine Year Plan nothing will be able to stay the victorious onward march of the followers of the Most Great Name.[3] May our efforts be worthy of the blessings and confirmations of Bahá’u’lláh.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Acquisition of Property Adjacent to Bahjí
18 November 1969

To National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

74.1 Enclosed please find our letter of 16 November 1969 addressed to the Bahá’ís of the World.[1] Please share this letter with all believers in your jurisdiction as soon as possible.

74.2 After several years of protracted negotiations with agencies of the Israel Government both in Jerusalem and Haifa, an important property adjacent to Bahjí and embracing the Master's teahouse has been acquired. On 17 November we cabled the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States as follows:

74.2a WITH GRATEFUL HEARTS ANNOUNCE SUCCESSFUL CONCLUSION FORMAL NEGOTIATIONS INITIATED NEARLY TWO DECADES AGO BY BELOVED GUARDIAN WITH AUTHORITIES STATE ISRAEL RESULTING OWNERSHIP VITALLY NEEDED PROPERTY SURROUNDING ‘ABDU’L-BAHÁ'S TEAHOUSE IMMEDIATE NEIGHBOURHOOD MOST HOLY TOMB FOUNDER FAITH. ACQUISITION MUCH DESIRED LAND EXTENDING GARDENS BAHJI FACILITATED THROUGH EXCHANGE PROPERTY DEDICATED SOME THIRTY-SIX YEARS AGO TO HOLY TOMB BAHÁ’U’LLÁH BY DEVOTED SERVANT CAUSE ḤÁJÍ ‘ALÍ YAZDÍ.
UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


74.3 The successful conclusion of these negotiations initiated during the life-time of the beloved Guardian was made possible through the acceptance by the Government, as even exchange, of an endowment property given to the Faith in 1933 by the late Ḥájí ‘Alí Yazdí. The significance of the specific piece of land donated by this venerable soul becomes apparent when reading the following quotation from the IN MEMORIAM article about him in The Bahá’í World, Volume 9 [624-25]:

74.3a He will forever be remembered, amongst other things, as the establisher of Bahá’í endowments in the vicinity of ‘Akká through his gift of a tract of land dedicated to Bahá’u’lláh's Holy Tomb in Bahjí. . . .
74.4 It is a glowing tribute to the memory of this devoted servant of the Blessed Beauty that his gift should play such an important part in securing this valuable additional safeguard for the Most Holy Tomb.

74.5 Please also convey the news of this victory to the friends.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Comments on the Guardianship and the Universal House of Justice
7 December 1969

To an individual Bahá’í

Dear Bahá’í Friend,

75.1 Your recent letter, in which you share with us the questions that have occurred to some of the youth in studying "The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh," has been carefully considered, and we feel that we should comment both on the particular passage you mention and on a related passage in the same work, because both bear on the relationship between the Guardianship and the Universal House of Justice.

75.2 The first passage concerns the Guardian's duty to insist upon a reconsideration by his fellow members in the Universal House of Justice of any enactment which he believes conflicts with the meaning and departs from the spirit of the Sacred Writings. The second passage concerns the infallibility of the Universal House of Justice without the Guardian, namely Shoghi Effendi's statement that "Without such an institution [the Guardianship] . . . the necessary guidance to define the sphere of the legislative action of its elected representatives would be totally withdrawn."[1]

75.3 Some of the youth, you indicate, were puzzled as to how to reconcile the former of these two passages with such statements as that in the Will of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá which affirms that the Universal House of Justice is "freed from all error."[2]


Seeking the Writings' Unity of Meaning

75.4 Just as the Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá does not in any way contradict the Kitáb-i-Aqdas but, in the Guardian's words, "confirms, supplements, and correlates the provisions of the Aqdas," so the writings of the Guardian contradict neither the revealed Word nor the interpretations of the Master.[3] In attempting to understand the Writings, therefore, one must first realize that there is and can be no real contradiction in them, and in the light of this we can confidently seek the unity of meaning which they contain.

75.5 The Guardian and the Universal House of Justice have certain duties and functions in common; each also operates within a separate and distinct sphere. As Shoghi Effendi explained, ". . . it is made indubitably clear and evident that the Guardian of the Faith has been made the Interpreter of the Word and that the Universal House of Justice has been invested with the function of legislating on matters not expressly revealed in the teachings. The interpretation of the Guardian, functioning within his own sphere, is as authoritative and binding as the enactments of the International House of Justice, whose exclusive right and prerogative is to pronounce upon and deliver the final judgement on such laws and ordinances as Bahá’u’lláh has not expressly revealed." He goes on to affirm, "Neither can, nor will ever, infringe upon the sacred and prescribed domain of the other. Neither will seek to curtail the specific and undoubted authority with which both have been divinely invested." It is impossible to conceive that two centers of authority, which the Master has stated "are both under the care and protection of the Abhá Beauty, under the shelter and unerring guidance of His Holiness, the Exalted One, could conflict with one another, because both are vehicles of the same Divine Guidance.[4]

75.6 The Universal House of Justice, beyond its function as the enactor of legislation, has been invested with the more general functions of protecting and administering the Cause, solving obscure questions and deciding upon matters that have caused difference. Nowhere is it stated that the infallibility of the Universal House of Justice is by virtue of the Guardian's membership or presence on that body. Indeed, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in His Will and Shoghi Effendi in his "Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh" have both explicitly stated that the elected members of the Universal House of Justice in consultation are recipients of unfailing Divine Guidance. Furthermore the Guardian himself in The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh asserted that "It must be also clearly understood by every believer that the institution of Guardianship does not under any circumstances abrogate, or even in the slightest degree detract from, the powers granted to the Universal House of Justice by Bahá’u’lláh in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, and repeatedly and solemnly confirmed by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in His Will. It does not constitute in any manner a contradiction to the Will and Writings of Bahá’u’lláh, nor does it nullify any of His revealed instructions."[5]

75.7 While the specific responsibility of the Guardian is the interpretation of the Word, he is also invested with all the powers and prerogatives necessary to discharge his function as Guardian of the Cause, its Head and supreme protector. He is, furthermore, made the irremovable head and member for life of the supreme legislative body of the Faith. It is as the head of the Universal House of Justice, and as a member of that body, that the Guardian takes part in the process of legislation. If the following passage, which gave rise to your query, is considered as referring to this last relationship, you will see that there is no contradiction between it and the other texts: "Though the Guardian of the Faith has been made the permanent head of so august a body he can never, even temporarily, assume the right of exclusive legislation. He cannot override the decision of the majority of his fellow members, but is bound to insist upon a reconsideration by them of any enactment he conscientiously believes to conflict with the meaning and to depart from the spirit of Bahá’u’lláh revealed utterances."[6]

75.8 Although the Guardian, in relation to his fellow members within the Universal House of Justice, cannot override the decision of the majority, it is inconceivable that the other members would ignore any objection he raised in the course of consultation or pass legislation contrary to what he expressed as being in harmony with the spirit of the Cause. It is, after all, the final act of judgement delivered by the Universal House of Justice that is vouchsafed infallibility, not any views expressed in the course of the process of enactment.

75.9 It can be seen, therefore, that there is no conflict between the Master's statements concerning the unfailing divine guidance conferred upon the Universal House of Justice and the above passage from "The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh."


The Process of Legislation

75.10 It may help the friends to understand this relationship if they are aware of some of the processes that the Universal House of Justice follows when legislating. First, of course, it observes the greatest care in studying the Sacred Texts and the interpretations of the Guardian as well as considering the views of all the members. After long consultation the process of drafting a pronouncement is put into effect. During this process the whole matter may well be reconsidered. As a result of such reconsideration the final judgement may be significantly different from the conclusion earlier favored, or possibly it may be decided not to legislate at all on that subject at that time. One can understand how great would be the attention paid to the views of the Guardian during the above process were he alive.


The Universal House Of Justice in the Absence of the Guardian

75.11 In considering the second passage we must once more hold fast to the principle that the teachings do not contradict themselves.

75.12 Future Guardians are clearly envisaged and referred to in the Writings, but there is nowhere any promise or guarantee that the line of Guardians would endure forever; on the contrary there are clear indications that the line could be broken. Yet, in spite of this, there is a repeated insistence in the Writings on the indestructibility of the Covenant and the immutability of God's Purpose for this Day.

75.13 One of the most striking passages which envisage the possibility of such a break in the line of Guardians is in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas itself:

The endowments dedicated to charity revert to God, the Revealer of Signs. No one has the right to lay hold on them without leave from the Dawning-Place of Revelation.[7] After Him the decision rests with the Aghṣán [Branches],[8] and after them with the House of Justice―should it be established in the world by then―so that they may use these endowments for the benefit of the Sites exalted in this Cause, and for that which they have been commanded by God, the Almighty, the All-Powerful. Otherwise the endowments should be referred to the people of Bahá, who speak not without His leave and who pass no judgement but in accordance with that which God has ordained in this Tablet, they who are the champions of victory betwixt heaven and earth, so that they may spend them on that which has been decreed in the Holy Book by God, the Mighty, the Bountiful.[9]
75.14 The passing of Shoghi Effendi in 1957 precipitated the very situation provided for in this passage, in that the line of Aghṣán ended before the House of Justice had been elected. Although, as is seen, the ending of the line of Aghṣán at some stage was provided for, we must never underestimate the grievous loss that the Faith has suffered. God's purpose for mankind remains unchanged, however, and the mighty Covenant of Bahá’u’lláh remains impregnable. Has not Bahá’u’lláh stated categorically, "The Hand of Omnipotence hath established His Revelation upon an unassailable, an enduring foundation."[10] While ‘Abdu’l-Bahá confirms: "Verily, God effecteth that which He pleaseth; naught can annul His Covenant; naught can obstruct His favor nor oppose His Cause!" "Everything is subject to corruption; but the Covenant of thy Lord shall continue to pervade all regions." "The tests of every dispensation are in direct proportion to the greatness of the Cause, and as heretofore such a manifest Covenant, written by the Supreme Pen, hath not been entered upon, the tests are proportionately severe. . . . These agitations of the violators are no more than the foam of the ocean, . . . This foam of the ocean shall not endure and shall soon disperse and vanish, while the ocean of the Covenant shall eternally surge and roar."[11] And Shoghi Effendi has clearly stated: "The bedrock on which this Administrative Order is founded is God's immutable Purpose for mankind in this day." ". . . this priceless gem of Divine Revelation, now still in its embryonic state, shall evolve within the shell of His law, and shall forge ahead, undivided and unimpaired, till it embraces the whole of mankind."[12]


Two Authoritative Centers

75.15 In the Bahá’í Faith there are two authoritative centers appointed to which the believers must turn, for in reality the Interpreter of the Word is an extension of that center which is the Word itself. The Book is the record of the utterance of Bahá’u’lláh, while the divinely inspired Interpreter is the living Mouth of that Book―it is he and he alone who can authoritatively state what the Book means. Thus one center is the Book with its Interpreter, and the other is the Universal House of Justice guided by God to decide on whatever is not explicitly revealed in the Book. This pattern of centers and their relationships is apparent at every stage in the unfoldment of the Cause. In the Kitáb-i-Aqdas Bahá’u’lláh tells the believers to refer after His passing to the Book, and to "Him Whom God hath purposed, Who hath branched from this Ancient Root."[13] In the Kitáb-i-‘Ahdí (the Book of Bahá’u’lláh's Covenant), He makes it clear that this reference is to ‘Abdu’l-Bahá.[14] In the Aqdas Bahá’u’lláh also ordains the institution of the Universal House of Justice, and confers upon it the powers necessary for it to discharge its ordained functions. The Master in His Will and Testament explicitly institutes the Guardianship, which Shoghi Effendi states was clearly anticipated in the verses of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, reaffirms and elucidates the authority of the Universal House of Justice, and refers the believers once again to the Book: "Unto the Most Holy Book everyone must turn, and all that is not expressly recorded therein must be referred to the Universal House of Justice," and at the very end of the Will He says: "All must seek guidance and turn unto the Center of the Cause and the House of Justice. And he that turneth unto whatsoever else is indeed in grievous error."[15]

75.16 As the sphere of jurisdiction of the Universal House of Justice in matters of legislation extends to whatever is not explicitly revealed in the Sacred Text, it is clear that the Book itself is the highest authority and delimits the sphere of action of the House of Justice. Likewise, the Interpreter of the Book must also have the authority to define the sphere of the legislative action of the elected representatives of the Cause. The writings of the Guardian and the advice given by him over the thirty-six years of his Guardianship show the way in which he exercised this function in relation to the Universal House of Justice as well as to National and Local Spiritual Assemblies.

75.17 The fact that the Guardian has the authority to define the sphere of the legislative action of the Universal House of Justice does not carry with it the corollary that without such guidance the Universal House of Justice might stray beyond the limits of its proper authority; such a deduction would conflict with all the other texts referring to its infallibility, and specifically with the Guardian's own clear assertion that the Universal House of Justice never can or will infringe on the sacred and prescribed domain of the Guardianship. It should be remembered, however, that although National and Local Spiritual Assemblies can receive divine guidance if they consult in the manner and spirit described by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, they do not share in the explicit guarantees of infallibility conferred upon the Universal House of Justice. Any careful student of the Cause can see with what care the Guardian, after the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, guided these elected representatives of the believers in the painstaking erection of the Administrative Order and in the formulation of Local and National Bahá’í Constitutions.

75.18 We hope that these elucidations will assist the friends in understanding these relationships more clearly, but we must all remember, that we stand too close to the beginnings of the System ordained by Bahá’u’lláh to be able fully to understand its potentialities or the interrelationships of its component parts. As Shoghi Effendi's secretary wrote on his behalf to an individual believer on 25 March 1930, "The contents of the Will of the Master are far too much for the present generation to comprehend. It needs at least a century of actual working before the treasures of wisdom hidden in it can be revealed.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Bahá’í Funds
1 January 1970

National Spiritual Assemblies of the Bahá’ís of the World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

76.1 In order to assist the friends everywhere in the proper appreciation of the importance and meaning of contributing to Bahá’í Funds, and to remind them as well as all Assemblies of the underlying principles that must govern the offering and administration of these funds, we have made a compilation of extracts from the Guardian's letters on this subject which we are now sharing with you.[1]

76.2 You may use these extracts in any manner you deem advisable, at conferences, in summer schools, in deepening classes, and in your newsletters and circular letters.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Noninterference in Political Affairs
8 February 1970

To National Spiritual Assemblies in Africa

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

77.1 For long centuries the African Continent, or rather that great part of it which lies south of the Sahara, remained relatively isolated from the rest of the world, untroubled and scarcely touched by the surging conflicts of the nations to the north and east. Now, rapidly emerging into the main stream of international interest, the African peoples, who were compared by Bahá’u’lláh to the black pupil of the eye through which "the light of the spirit shineth forth,"[1] are being swept by the heady enthusiasms of new-found independence, torn by the conflicting forces of divergent political interests, their vision obscured by the haze of materialism and the dust of nationalistic passions and age-old tribal rivalries.

77.2 In the midst of the storm and stress of the battles of selfish interests being waged about them, stand the followers of the Most Great Name, their sight attracted to the rising Sun of God's Holy Cause, their hearts welded together in a bond of true unity with all the children of men, and their voices raised in a universal song of praise to the Glory of God and the oneness of mankind, calling on their fellowmen to forget and forgo their differences and join them in obedience and service to God's Holy Command in this Day.

77.3 The Army of the Cause, advancing at the bidding of the Lord, to conquer the hearts of men, can never be defeated, but its rate of advance can be slowed down by acts of unwisdom and ignorance on the part of its supporters. We are writing you this letter to help in clarifying some of the issues that have, in the past, blurred the vision of some of the believers, and caused them to commit errors of judgement which have retarded the progress of the Faith in their countries.


The Principle of Noninterference in Political Affairs

77.4 One of these issues, and by far the most important, is a lack of appreciation of the implications of the Bahá’í principle of non-interference in political affairs. We find that ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi have given us clear and convincing reasons why we must uphold this principle. These reasons are summarized below for the study and deepening of the friends. It is our hope that these observations will not only help the friends to intelligently and radiantly follow the holy teachings on this matter, but will help them to explain the Bahá’í attitude to those who may question its wisdom and usefulness:

77.4a The Faith of God is the sole source of salvation for mankind today. The true cause of the ills of humanity is its disunity. No matter how perfect may be the machinery devised by the leaders of men for the political unity of the world, it will still not provide the antidote to the poison sapping the vigor of present-day society. These ills can be cured only through the instrumentality of God's Faith. There are many well-wishers of mankind who devote their efforts to relief work and charity and to the material well-being of man, but only Bahá’ís can do the work which God most wants done. When we devote ourselves to the work of the Faith we are doing a work which is the greatest aid and only refuge for a needy and divided world.
77.4b The Bahá’í Community is a worldwide organization seeking to establish true and universal peace on earth. If a Bahá’í works for one political party to overcome another it is a negation of the very spirit of the Faith. Membership in any political party, therefore, necessarily entails repudiation of some or all of the principles of peace and unity proclaimed by Bahá’u’lláh. As ‘Abdu’l-Bahá stated: "Our party is God's party―we don't belong to any party."[2]
77.4c If a Bahá’í were to insist on his right to support a certain political party, he could not deny the same degree of freedom to other believers. This would mean that within the ranks of the Faith, whose primary mission is to unite all men as one great family under God, there would be Bahá’ís opposed to each other. Where, then, would be the example of unity and harmony which the world is seeking?
77.4d If the institutions of the Faith, God forbid, became involved in politics, the Bahá’ís would find themselves arousing antagonism instead of love. If they took one stand in one country, they would be bound to change the views of the people in another country about the aims and purposes of the Faith. By becoming involved in political disputes, the Bahá’ís instead of changing the world or helping it, would themselves be lost and destroyed. The world situation is so confused and moral issues which were once clear have become so mixed up with selfish and battling factions, that the best way Bahá’ís can serve the highest interests of their country and the cause of true salvation for the world, is to sacrifice their political pursuits and affiliations and wholeheartedly and fully support the divine system of Bahá’u’lláh.
77.4e The Faith is not opposed to the true interests of any nation, nor is it against any party or faction. It holds aloof from all controversies and transcends them all, while enjoining upon its followers loyalty to government and a sane patriotism. This love for their country the Bahá’ís show by serving its well-being in their daily activity, or by working in the administrative channels of the government instead of through party politics or in diplomatic or political posts. The Bahá’ís may, indeed are encouraged to mix with all strata of society, with the highest authorities and with leading personalities as well as with the mass of the people, and should bring the knowledge of the Faith to them; but in so doing they should strictly avoid becoming identified, or identifying the Faith, with political pursuits and party programs.
77.5 So vital is this principle of non-interference in political matters, which must govern the acts and words of Bahá’ís in every land, that Shoghi Effendi has written that "Neither the charges which the uninformed and the malicious may be led to bring against them, nor the allurements of honors and rewards" would ever induce the true believers to deviate from this path, and that their words and conduct must proclaim that the followers of Bahá’u’lláh "are actuated by no selfish ambition, that they neither thirst for power, nor mind any wave of unpopularity, of distrust or criticism, which a strict adherence to their standards might provoke."[3]

77.6 "Difficult and delicate though be our task," he continues, "the sustaining power of Bahá’u’lláh and of His Divine guidance will assuredly assist us if we follow steadfastly in His way, and strive to uphold the integrity of His laws. The light of His redeeming grace, which no earthly power can obscure, will if we persevere, illuminate our path, as we steer our course amid the snares and pitfalls of a troubled age, and will enable us to discharge our duties in a manner that would redound to the glory and the honor of His blessed Name."[4]


The Problem of Tribalism

77.7 The second issue which causes difficulties for the African friends in these days is the matter of tribalism. As Bahá’ís they are convinced that mankind is one and must be viewed as one entity, yet, as members of their respective tribes, they find themselves expected by their non-Bahá’í brothers to give their first loyalty to, and even aggressively pursue the interests of their tribe. They live, moreover, in an atmosphere which is only too often one of mistrust, fear and even hatred against the members of other tribes.

77.8 The Bahá’í attitude in such a situation is clearly set forth in the Writings. As Bahá’ís we are attached to our tribes and clans, just as we are to our families and, on a larger scale, to our nations, but we do not allow this attachment to conflict with our wider loyalty to humanity. The followers of the Faith, the Guardian has clearly stated , will not hesitate to subordinate every particular interest, be it personal, regional or national, to the overriding interests of the generality of mankind, knowing full well that in a world of interdependent peoples and nations the advantage of the part is best to be reached by the advantage of the whole, and that no lasting result can be achieved by any of the component parts if the general interests of the entity itself are neglected."[5]

77.9 In further elucidating this theme he has written: "Let there be no misgivings as to the animating purpose of the worldwide Law of Bahá’u’lláh. . . . It does not ignore nor does it attempt to suppress the diversity of ethnical origins, of climate, of history, of language and tradition, of thought and habit, that differentiate the peoples and nations of the world. It calls for a wider loyalty, for a larger aspiration than any that has animated the human race. It insists upon the subordination of national impulses and interests to the imperative claims of a unified world. It repudiates excessive centralization on one hand, and disclaims all attempts at uniformity on the other. Its watchword is unity in diversity . . ."[6]


The Example of a Unified Community

77.10 In these days when tribal tensions are increasing in Africa the friends should be vigilant lest any trace of prejudice or hatred, God forbid, may enter their midst. On the contrary, they should endeavor to bring into the Faith an ever-larger representation of the various tribes in each country, and through complete lack of prejudice as well as through the love that Bahá’ís have for each other and for their non-Bahá’í neighbors, demonstrate to their countrymen what the Word of God can do. They will thus provide, for the scrutiny of the leaders and rulers of their countries, a shining example of a unified community, working together in full concord and harmony, demonstrating a hope that is attainable, and a pattern worthy to be emulated.

77.11 To discriminate against any tribes because they are in a minority is a violation of the spirit that animates the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh. As followers of God's Holy Faith it is our obligation to protect the just interests of any minority element within the Bahá’í community. In fact in the administration of our Bahá’í affairs, representatives of minority groups are not only enabled to enjoy equal rights and privileges, but they are even favored and accorded priority. Bahá’ís should be careful never to deviate from this noble standard, even if the course of events or public opinion should bring pressure to bear upon them.

77.12 The principles in the Writings are clear, but usually it is when these principles are applied that questions arise. In all cases where the correct course of action is not clear believers should consult their National Spiritual Assembly who will exercise their judgement in advising the friends on the best course to follow.

77.13 It is the hope and prayer of the Universal House of Justice that National Spiritual Assemblies in Africa will, in full collaboration with the Continental Boards of Counselors and Auxiliary Boards in their areas, act as loving shepherds to the divine flock in that mighty Continent, protect the friends from the evil influences surrounding them, guide them in the true and right path, and assist them to attain a continuously deeper understanding, a firmer conviction and a more consuming love for the Cause they are so devotedly seeking to promote and serve.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Attainment of Consultative Status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council
18 February 1970

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

78.1 JOYFULLY ANNOUNCE BAHÁ’Í WORLD ATTAINMENT CONSULTATIVE STATUS UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL THEREBY FULFILLING LONG CHERISHED HOPE BELOVED GUARDIAN AND WORLD CENTER GOAL NINE YEAR PLAN.[1] SUSTAINED PERSISTENT EFFORTS MORE THAN TWENTY YEARS ACCREDITED REPRESENTATIVES BAHÁ’Í INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY UNITED NATIONS DEVOTED SUPPORT BAHÁ’Í COMMUNITIES THROUGHOUT WORLD FINALLY REWARDED. SIGNIFICANT ACHIEVEMENT ADDS PRESTIGE INFLUENCE RECOGNITION EVER ADVANCING FAITH BAHÁ’U’LLÁH. OFFERING PRAYERS GRATITUDE HOLY SHRINES.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/The Spirit of Bahá’í Consultation
6 March 1970

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Canada

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

79.1 We have your letter of 14 January 1970 asking questions about the decision-making process of Spiritual Assemblies.

79.2 It is important to realize that the spirit of Bahá’í consultation is very different from that current in the decision-making processes of non-Bahá’í bodies.

79.3 The ideal of Bahá’í consultation is to arrive at a unanimous decision. When this is not possible a vote must be taken. In the words of the beloved Guardian: ". . . when they are called upon to arrive at a certain decision, they should, after dispassionate, anxious, and cordial consultation, turn to God in prayer, and with earnestness and conviction and courage record their vote and abide by the voice of the majority, which we are told by our Master to be the voice of truth, never to be challenged, and always to be wholeheartedly enforced."[1]

79.4 As soon as a decision is reached it becomes the decision of the whole Assembly, not merely of those members who happened to be among the majority.

79.5 When it is proposed to put a matter to the vote, a member of the Assembly may feel that there are additional facts or views which must be sought before he can make up his mind and intelligently vote on the proposition. He should express this feeling to the Assembly, and it is for the Assembly to decide whether or not further consultation is needed before voting.

79.6 Whenever it is decided to vote on a proposition all that is required is to ascertain how many of the members are in favor of it; if this is a majority of those present, the motion is carried; if it is a minority, the motion is defeated. Thus the whole question of "abstaining" does not arise in Bahá’í voting. A member who does not vote in favor of a proposition is, in effect, voting against it, even if at that moment he himself feels that he has been unable to make up his mind on the matter.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Commemoration of the Centenary of the Martyrdom of Mírzá Mihdí, the Purest Branch
25 March 1970

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

80.1 In commemoration of the centenary of the martyrdom of the Purest Branch, which falls on 23 June 1970, we call upon the Bahá’ís of the world to unite in prayer for "the regeneration of the world and the unification of its peoples."[1]

80.2 During those days one hundred years ago Bahá’u’lláh was enduring His imprisonment in the Barracks of ‘Akká. Upon the tribulations which weighed Him down was heaped the fatal accident which befell His young son, His companion and amanuensis, Mírzá Mihdi, the Purest Branch, whose dying supplication to his Father was to accept his life "as a ransom for those of His loved ones who yearned for, but were unable to attain, His presence."[2] In a Tablet revealed in that grievous hour Bahá’u’lláh sorrows that "This is the day whereon he that was created of the light of Bahá has suffered martyrdom, at a time when he lay imprisoned at the hands of his enemies." Yet He makes clear that the youth passing has a far profounder meaning than His acceptance of the simple request, declaring that "Thou art, verily, the trust of God and His treasure in this land. Erelong will God reveal through thee that which He hath desired." In a prayer revealed for His son He proclaims the purpose underlying the tragedy: "I have, O my Lord, offered up that which Thou hast given Me, that Thy servants may be quickened, and all that dwell on earth be united."[3] Thus upon a youth of consummate devotion who demonstrated such beauty of spirit and total dedication was conferred a unique station in the Cause of God.

80.3 In your recalling the bereavement of Bahá’u’lláh upon the loss of His loved son, and honoring a highly significant event in the Faith, we leave it to the discretion of the Assemblies whether they choose to hold special gatherings of prayer. In the Holy Land at the World Center on Mount Carmel there will be an observance at the grave of Mírzá Mihdi, at which time his pure example and sacrifice for all mankind will be remembered through the words of his glorious Father.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


80.4 For your background and appreciation of the nature of the martyrdom of the Purest Branch, we refer you to God Passes By, pp. 188-89, and to Bahá’í Holy Places at the World Center, pp. 60, and 70-74, from which the several quotations above are derived.


/*chapter*/Message to Bolivia and Mauritius Conferences―August 1970
August 1970

To the Continental Conference in La Paz, Bolivia, and the Oceanic Conference in Rose-Hill, Mauritius

Beloved Friends,

82.1 Our hearts turn with eager expectancy to the twin Conferences now in session in the southern hemisphere. Their convocation so shortly after the worldwide commemoration of the Centenary of the Martyrdom of the Purest Branch, calls to mind that the promotion and establishment of the Faith of God have always been through sacrifice and dedicated service.[1] Indeed, these very Conferences testify to the creative power, the fruitfulness, the invocation of Divine confirmations which result from sacrificial service to the Cause of God. Although both Bolivia and Mauritius are mentioned specifically in the Tablets of the Divine Plan, the Cause, even thirty-five years ago, was virtually unknown in those areas; today we witness the holding of these historic Conferences.[2]

82.2 Little wonder that South America, whose rulers and presidents were addressed by Bahá’u’lláh in His Kitáb-i-Aqdas, of whose indigenous believers the Master, in those Tablets already referred to, wrote "should they be educated and guided, there can be no doubt that they will become so illumined as to enlighten the whole world,"[3] should have exerted a magnetic attraction upon a number of ardent souls in the northern continent, eager to serve in so promising a field.[4] A band of heroic pioneers, bearing the Message of Bahá’u’lláh, gradually penetrated its wide territories, its jungles and mountains. They were followed by others under systematic crusades of two Seven Year Plans and the beloved Guardian's Ten Year Plan and together they became the spiritual conquerors of that continent.[5] The Latin American communities which arose as a result of their pioneer efforts were described by the beloved Guardian as "associates in the execution" of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Divine Plan.[6] May Maxwell, one of the great heroines of the Faith, attained her longed-for crown of martyrdom in Buenos Aires; Panama became the site of the sixth Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs of the Bahá’í world, and La Paz, Bolivia, is now the scene of this Continental Conference.

82.3 The Indian Ocean, whose furthermost waves lap the shores of the Cradle of our Faith, upon whose waters the Divine Báb traveled in the course of His pilgrimage to Mecca, the heart of Islam, where He openly announced His Mission; whose mighty subcontinent from which it derives its name was the home and assigned province of the ninth Letter of the Living; whose major islands were severally mentioned by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in the seventh of His Tablets of the Divine Plan, lay, for most of a century, fallow to the Word of God, a challenge to the promotion of His Faith.[7] This challenge was answered by half a hundred Knights of Bahá’u’lláh, who, in response to the beloved Guardian's call left their homes and wholeheartedly gave themselves to the establishment of the Cause in those parts. They implanted the banner of Bahá’u’lláh upon its atolls, its great islands and ordering territories. Now, in the midmost heart of that huge expanse of sea, Mauritius, an island whose name was enshrined in Bahá’í history during the Heroic Age of our Faith as the source, two years before ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's arrival in America, of a contribution to the purchase of the site of the Mother Temple of the West, has been chosen as the venue of this oceanic Conference.

82.4 Not only have the institutions of the Faith been established in this ocean and this continent, but the spirit of the New Day, brilliant even at this early dawn with the light of Bahá’u’lláh's gifts to man, is apparent in the diversity of the attendants, in the brotherhood of erstwhile strangers―even enemies―and above all in the noble purposes for which you have gathered.

82.5 Your aim is the redemption of mankind from its godlessness, its ignorance, its confusion and conflict. You will succeed, as those before you succeeded, by sacrifice to the Cause of God. The deeds and services required of you now, will shine in the future, even as those of your spiritual predecessors shine today and will forever shine in the annals of the Cause.

82.6 We share with you the spiritual delight of these occasions and assure you of our constant and ardent prayers that your deliberations upon the objectives of the Cause in your areas and the spiritual fellowship which you will enjoy will result in immediate and determined plans to complete the tasks assigned to you ere the rapidly approaching end of the Nine Year Plan. This Plan is the current stage of the Master's Divine Plan and its success must precede those greater triumphs when, as the result of your labors, the divine outpourings will raise up a vast concourse of radiant and devoted servants of Bahá’u’lláh who will establish His Kingdom in this world.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Call for Pioneers
2 August 1970

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

83.1 All National Spiritual Assemblies have been aware of the urgency of our Riḍván 1969 message to the Bahá’ís of the world when the call was raised for pioneers to settle in territories in need of pioneer support or as yet unopened to the Faith, and have been cognizant of the emphasis which was placed on the need for the believers to arise quickly to ensure the success of the Nine Year Plan in the pioneer field.

83.2 Since that call was raised, no less than 330 of the pioneer posts in the 184 specified territories in the globe have been filled, and in a few of those territories additional pioneers have arrived to supplement the ranks of Bahá’u’lláh's followers at those posts.

83.3 As you will note from the attached list[1] showing the current status of pioneer goals, some 417 pioneers must yet arise and settle in the posts previously assigned. After a recent review of pioneer needs we find it is necessary to call upon the valiant, constantly swelling community of believers throughout all continents to fill yet another 204 pioneer posts where manpower is desperately needed, in some territories in order to win the minimum number of Assemblies or localities called for in the Plan, and in others where vast new mass teaching areas have been opened to the Faith, thus necessitating additional reinforcements who must arrive soon if the precious gains are to be retained. These 204 new pioneer goals have been assigned to specific National Spiritual Assemblies.

83.4 Despite the magnitude of this undertaking and the grave challenge which your communities face in ensuring the home-front goals, we are compelled to point out that each of those goals assigned must be considered as a minimum requirement. Pioneers unable to go to the goals assigned by their own National Spiritual Assembly should be encouraged to fill goals assigned to other National Assemblies. Of course a self-supporting believer is free to settle as a pioneer in any country he chooses.

83.5 We call upon the friends to act promptly and decisively in this vital international undertaking in which the followers of Bahá’u’lláh are, in all continents of the globe, summoned to participate. The time is short and the effort required is truly formidable.

83.6 We shall offer ardent prayers at the Holy Shrines, supplicating that the waves of pioneers required to complete this urgent task of the present hour shall arise and quickly rush forth into the arena of service.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on the Local Spiritual Assembly
11 August 1970

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

84.1 As the Bahá’í Administrative Order rapidly expands throughout the world it behooves everyone associated with it to familiarize himself with its principles, to understand its import and to put its precepts into practice. Only as individual members of Local Spiritual Assemblies deepen themselves in the fundamental verities of the Faith and in the proper application of the principles governing the operation of the Assembly will this institution grow and develop toward its full potential.

84.2 It is because the principles of Bahá’í Administration are new to so many who are now being called upon to serve as members of Local Spiritual Assemblies that we felt the need to make available in brief form some of the texts and instructions which apply.[1] No attempt has been made to put together a complete compilation of all texts from the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi, but it is hoped that the enclosed extracts will suffice as an introduction to a more profound study of the subject, and lead to a more efficient functioning of Local Spiritual Assemblies everywhere.

84.3 We call upon you to consider ways and means of sharing this material with the friends, and especially members of Local Spiritual Assemblies, as quickly as possible. In many instances, of course, the material will need to be translated; in other instances many of the quotations included in the compilation may already be available to the friends in their own language.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Formation of Seven National Spiritual Assemblies during Riḍván 1971
12 August 1970

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

85.1 The following cable has just been sent to Hands of the Cause Rúḥíyyih Khánum and William Sears representing the Universal House of Justice at Conferences in Bolivia and Mauritius:

PLEASE ANNOUNCE TO PARTICIPANTS CONFERENCE JOYOUS NEWS DECISION CALL THREE ADDITIONAL NATIONAL CONVENTIONS NEXT RIḌVÁN NAMELY SUDAN CHAD AND CONGO BRAZZAVILLE GABON BRINGING TO SEVEN NEW NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES BEING FORMED AT CLOSE OF SEVENTH YEAR NINE YEAR PLAN. FERVENTLY PRAYING HOLY SHRINES BEHALF NATIONAL COMMUNITIES BAHÁ’Í WORLD REACHING ONE HUNDRED ONE BY NEXT RIḌVÁN SUPPLICATING REINFORCEMENT TIES UNITING THEM GREATER CONSECRATION CHALLENGING TASKS STILL AHEAD WIDER PARTICIPATION ALL RANKS FAITHFUL. COMMUNICATING TEXT CABLE ALL NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES.
85.2 Please share this news with the friends.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to Pioneers
29 November 1970

To all Pioneers[1]

Dearly loved Friends,

86.1 The spirit of self-sacrifice and devotion that has animated so large a number of the followers of Bahá’u’lláh to leave their homes, move to posts far and near, to foreign lands and on the homefronts, to hoist the banner of the Faith and promote the divine teachings in well-nigh every populated area of the globe, uplifts our hearts and evokes our profound pride and admiration. We are now entering the most challenging and crucial closing period of the Nine Year Plan, that will culminate in the joyous celebration of the hundredth anniversary of the revelation of Bahá’u’lláh's Most Holy Book, the Kitáb-i-Aqdas. What greater gift can we lay at the feet of our Beloved, at that historic moment, than the proclamation of Victory in His Name!

86.2 Our deep appreciation of the vital role which the pioneers play in the onward march of the Army of Light towards victory arouses in us the desire to comfort their hearts, upraise their spirits, and strengthen their loins by calling to their minds the stirring appeal which flowed from the Pen of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá:

86.2a O that I could travel, even though on foot and in the utmost poverty, to these regions, and, raising the call of "Ya Bahá’u’l-Abhá" in cities, villages, mountains, deserts and oceans, promote the Divine teachings! This, alas, I cannot do. How intensely I deplore it! Please God, ye may achieve it.[2]
and the following words of guidance from our beloved Guardian:

86.2b Theirs, at this present hour, unpropitious and unpromising though the immediate prospects may appear, is the duty to plod on, confident and unsparing in their daily efforts, undimmed in their vision, alert and conscious of the sublimity of their calling and of the future glory of their Mission, undistracted by the petty pursuits and temptations of the environment in which they live, exerting their utmost, and playing, each independently, as well as through their concerted efforts, their part in hastening the advent of the day when their dearly beloved Faith will, at long last, have revealed the full measure of its potentialities, and soared, as destined by Providence, to new heights of power, of eminence and glory.[3]
It is hard for the friends to appreciate, when they are isolated in one of these goal territories, and see that they are making no progress in teaching others, are living in inhospitable climes for the most part, and are lonesome for Bahá’í companionship and activity, that they represent a force for good, that they are like a lighthouse of Bahá’u’lláh shining at a strategic point and casting its beam out into the darkness. This is why he [Shoghi Effendi] so consistently urges these pioneers not to abandon their posts.[4]
However gigantic the task may be, no matter how insuperable the obstacles standing in the way of its accomplishment may appear, and however restricted the means, capacity, and numbers of those called upon to ensure its fulfillment, it surely cannot, by virtue of the divine potency with which it is charged, but be successfully achieved in due time. God's redemptive grace, flowing through the small yet infinitely resourceful band of His faithful servants will, as in the days past, gradually permeate the world, and infuse into the consciousness of peoples and nations alike the realization that nothing short of the divine panacea He Himself has prescribed can cure the ills now so sadly afflicting the whole of mankind. What a higher privilege therefore than to be the instrument, the channel for the transmission of such divine grace. Let us then take courage, and faithfully pursue our mission, and rest ever assured that the promised day of victory, foretold by Bahá’u’lláh as marking the golden age of His Cause, will dawn upon us and upon a world as yet unconscious of the divine potency of His Message.[5]
And finally from the Pen of Glory Itself:

86.2c They that have forsaken their country for the purpose of teaching Our Cause―these shall the Faithful Spirit strengthen through its power. A company of Our chosen angels shall go forth with them, as bidden by Him Who is the Almighty, the All-Wise. How great the blessedness that awaiteth him that hath attained the honor of serving the Almighty! By My life! No act, however great, can compare with it, except such deeds as have been ordained by God, the All-Powerful, the Most Mighty. Such a service is, indeed, the prince of all goodly deeds, and the ornament of every goodly act. Thus hath it been ordained by Him Who is the Sovereign Ruler, the Ancient of Days.[6]
86.3 To each and every one of you we send our love and assurance of our prayers on your behalf in the Holy Shrines.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Grave Crisis in Bahá’í International Fund
29 December 1970

To the Followers of Bahá’u’lláh in every land

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

87.1 We have reached a critical point in the progress of the Nine Year Plan. In many lands multitudes are thirsty and eager to embrace the Message of Bahá’u’lláh. In others, materially advanced but spiritually backward, a great effort is needed to awaken the people to the light of this New Day. The recently established National Spiritual Assemblies in many lands are occupied in acquiring the Ḥaẓíratu’l-Quds, Temple Sites, National Endowments and Teaching Institutes essential for the proper development of the Administrative Order and the deepening of the Bahá’í knowledge of their believers, while in the heart of the Western Hemisphere, the Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs of Panama requires several hundred thousand dollars for its completion. To accomplish these many essential tasks the resources of the Cause are being stretched to their uttermost.

87.2 At this crucial moment, when the activities of the believers and the expenditure of funds should be increased to seize the opportunities which lie before us, the Bahá’í International Fund finds itself plunged into a grave crisis by a steep reduction in contributions. Undoubtedly worldwide economic difficulties are one of the causes of this, but we are confident that the believers throughout the world will respond to this challenge and will make every sacrifice to ensure that the work of the Cause of God goes forward unimpeded.


Demands on the International Fund

87.3 Since 1963 when there were 56 National Spiritual Assemblies, to the present time when there are 94 (soon to be 101), the work of the Cause has expanded so rapidly, both in the teaching field and at the World Center, that the Universal House of Justice has had to increase more than fourfold the annual international budget of the Cause. This year fifty-eight percent of the International Fund is being expended outside the Holy Land on projects such as assistance to National Spiritual Assemblies (56 of which receive a large part, if not all, of their budgets from the World Center), contributions to the work of the Hands of the Cause and the Continental Boards of Counselors, defence of the Cause in lands where it is facing persecution, and our expanded activities at the United Nations.

87.4 In order to meet the present situation the Universal House of Justice must drastically reduce the expenditure of the Bahá’í International Fund until the flow of contributions is restored. While the work on the International Archives Building necessary to protect the precious Tablets and relics from the high humidity and increasingly polluted atmosphere of Haifa city has been completed, the projects of further developing the Gardens in Bahjí and of starting upon an extension of the Terraces below the Shrine of the Báb, as well as additional developments to the office facilities of the World Center, must now be postponed. In addition we are reluctantly compelled to reduce by ten percent the next two quarterly remittances of assistance to National Spiritual Assemblies, and we call upon these Assemblies now to reduce their own expenditure to take account of this.

87.5 These, however, can but be temporary measures designed to minimize the present emergency. The real answer lies, not in restricting the activities of the friends at this time when mankind stands in such dire need of the Message of Bahá’u’lláh, but in the universal participation of every believer in the work of the Cause.


Backbone of the Fund: Universal Participation

87.6 The poor believers vastly outnumber the wealthy ones, and this majority will grow rapidly as mass teaching spreads. Thus, although the work in mass teaching areas will continue to be assisted by the contributions of the friends ,in prosperous lands, and these believers must for the immediate future continue to be the main support of the International Fund, it becomes ever more urgent for the friends in mass teaching areas to finance their own activities to an ever greater degree. The backbone of the Fund must be the regular contributions of every believer. Even though such contributions may be small because of the poverty of the donors, large numbers of small sums combine into a mighty river that can carry along the work of the Cause. Moreover the unity of the friends in sacrifice draws upon them the confirmations of the Blessed Beauty.

87.7 The universal participation of the believers in every aspect of the Faith―in contributing to the Fund, in teaching, deepening, living the Bahá’í life, administering the affairs of the community, and, above all, in the life of prayer and devotion to God―will endow the Bahá’í community with such strength that it can overcome the forces of spiritual disintegration which are engulfing the non-Bahá’í world, and can become an ocean of oneness that will cover the face of the planet.

87.8 We ask every one of you to ponder these matters deeply, and to join us in fervent prayer that this momentary crisis will prove to have been a providential test that will spur the community of the Greatest Name to new heights of dedication and triumphant achievement.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to the Monrovia Conference―January 1971
January 1971

To the Friends of God assembled in the Conference in Monrovia, Liberia

Dearly loved Friends,

88.1 The emergence on the African Continent of a widely spread, numerous, diversified and united Bahá’í community, so swiftly after the initiation of organized teaching plans there, is of the utmost significance and a signal evidence of the bounties which God has destined for its peoples in this day.

88.2 The great victories in Africa, which brought such joy to the Guardian's heart in the last years of his life, resulted from the self-sacrificing devotion of a handful of pioneers, gradually assisted by the first few native believers, all laboring under the loving shadow of the Hand of the Cause Músá Banání. From their efforts there has been raised up an increasing army of African, teachers, administrators, pioneers and valiant promoters of the Divine Cause, whose main task is to bring to all Africa the bounties conferred by the Word of God, bounties of enlightenment, zeal, devotion and eventually the true civilization of Bahá’u’lláh's World Order.

88.3 Many of the gravest ills now afflicting the human race appear in acute form on the African Continent. Racial, tribal and religious prejudice, disunity of nations, the scourge of political factionalism, poverty and lack of education are obvious examples. Bahá’ís have a great part to play―greater than they may realize―in the healing of these sicknesses and the abatement of their worst effects. By their radiant unity, by their "bright and shining"[1] faces, their self-discipline in zealously following all the requirements of Bahá’í law, their abstention from politics, their constant study and proclamation of the Great Message, they will hasten the advent of that glorious day when all mankind will know its true brotherhood and will bask in the sunshine of God's love and blessing.

88.4 That the African believers are fully capable of taking their full share in building the Kingdom of God on earth, their natural abilities and present deeds have fully demonstrated. An African Hand of the Cause of God, even now in the course of a brilliant, triumphal teaching tour of the planet, African Counselors, Board members, national and local administrators and an ever-increasing army of believers testify to the vigor and immense capacity of this highly blessed continent to serve its Lord in the great day of His appearance.[2] That the African believers, so beloved by the Guardian of the Faith, will rise to the challenge facing them and earn the gratitude and goodwill of all mankind by their deeds of dedication and self-sacrifice is the longing of our hearts.

88.5 May this Conference become a sun from which will stream forth to all parts of the vast continent rays of spiritual energy and inspiration, galvanizing the friends to action in the fields of teaching and pioneering in such manner that they will rapidly achieve all the tasks assigned to them under the Nine Year Plan.

88.6 Our thoughts and prayers are with you.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to the Oceanic Conference, of the South China Seas, Singapore―January 1971
January 1971

To the Friends of God assembled in the Oceanic Conference in Singapore, Malaysia

Dearly loved Friends,

89.1 The wonderful progress made by the Bahá’í communities of South East Asia towards achievement of the tasks assigned to them under the Nine Year Plan fills our hearts with thankfulness to God and arouses our keenest admiration for the capacities and dedicated services of the friends in all those vast and varied territories. Indeed, so bountiful have been the divine confirmations rewarding their efforts that we are confident of their ability to far exceed the stated objectives and to initiate the opening phase of the next stage of their development, a massive increase in the establishment of the Cause of God among the teeming millions of the islands and ocean-bordering countries of so huge an area of the earth.

89.2 South East Asia, whose gifted and industrious peoples have embraced four of the world's major religions, have produced in all ages civilizations and cultures representative of the highest accomplishments of the human race, now experiencing with the rest of the world the disruptive, revolutionizing, "vibrating influence of this most great, this new World Order . . . the like of which mortal eyes have never witnessed," lies open and receptive to the Word of God, ready once more to nourish in its fertile soil that potent seed and to bring forth, in its own characteristic manner and as an integral part of the world civilization, the institutions, the fabric, the brilliant edifice of Bahá’u’lláh's World Order.[1]

89.3 We now summon the believers of this highly promising area, flushed with the tide of approaching victory, to launch a three-pronged campaign, the main feature of which is to achieve an immediate expansion of the Faith, exceeding the aims of the Nine Year Plan. In addition you are called upon to raise a corps of travelling teachers, whose main objective will be to visit all the communities and groups in the area for the purpose of deepening and consolidating their Bahá’í life, thus preserving the victories won and reinforcing the base for future development. Simultaneously a number of Chinese-speaking believers must arise who, as pioneers and travelling teachers in all the countries of South East Asia, will attract large numbers of the talented Chinese race to embrace and serve the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh.

89.4 Recognizing your current achievements and fully confident in your determination and ability to continue to attract the divine confirmations of Bahá’u’lláh, we are happy to announce as a supplementary goal of the Nine Year Plan, the establishment, at Riḍván, 1972, of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Singapore, an additional supporting pillar of the Universal House of Justice and a new bastion of the Faith in so vital a cross-roads of human activity.

89.5 We pray that your deliberations will engender a new wave of enthusiasm, cement ever more firmly the bonds of love between the many and various national communities of your area and result in practical plans for the implementation of the above tasks.

89.6 We send you all our most loving greetings and look forward eagerly to the report of your conference.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Agnes Alexander
4 January 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

90.1 PROFOUNDLY GRIEVE PASSING ILLUMINED SOUL HAND CAUSE AGNES ALEXANDER LONG-STANDING PILLAR CAUSE FAR EAST FIRST BRING FAITH HAWAIIAN ISLANDS.[1] HER LONG DEDICATED EXEMPLARY LIFE SERVICE DEVOTION CAUSE GOD ANTICIPATED BY CENTER COVENANT SELECTING HER SHARE MAY MAXWELL IMPERISHABLE HONOR MENTION TABLETS DIVINE PLAN. HER UNRESTRAINED UNCEASING PURSUIT TEACHING OBEDIENCE COMMAND BAHÁ’U’LLÁH EXHORTATIONS MASTER GUIDANCE BELOVED GUARDIAN SHINING EXAMPLE ALL FOLLOWERS FAITH. HER PASSING SEVERS ONE MORE LINK HEROIC AGE. ASSURE FAMILY FRIENDS ARDENT PRAYERS HOLIEST SHRINE PROGRESS RADIANT SOUL REQUEST ALL NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES HOLD MEMORIAL MEETINGS AND THOSE RESPONSIBLE HOLD SERVICES MOTHER TEMPLES.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Participation of the Hands of the Cause of God in First National Conventions
1 February 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

91.1 HAPPY ANNOUNCE FOLLOWING HANDS CAUSE WILL REPRESENT UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE FIRST NATIONAL CONVENTIONS COMING RIḌVÁN AMATU’L-BAHÁ RÚḤÍYYIH KHÁNUM IVORY COAST UPPER VOLTA MALI ZIKRULLAH KHADEM TRINIDAD TOBAGO ADELBERT MÜHLSCHLEGEL LESOTHO ‘ALÍ-MUḤAMMAD VARQÁ CONGO BRAZZAVILLE GABON ENOCH OLINGA BOTH SUDAN CHAD COLLIS FEATHERSTONE BOTH SOLOMON ISLANDS SOUTHWEST PACIFIC OCEAN. CONFIDENT PRESENCE PARTICIPATION THESE STANDARD-BEARERS NINE YEAR PLAN HISTORIC FIRST CONVENTIONS WILL ATTRACT DIVINE BLESSINGS ASSIST NEW NATIONAL COMMUNITIES BEFITTINGLY ASSUME SACRED RESPONSIBILITIES.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Formation of Nine Additional National Spiritual Assemblies during Riḍván 1971
11 February 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

92.1 REJOICE ANNOUNCE ALL FRIENDS FORMATION DURING RIḌVÁN 1972 NINE ADDITIONAL NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES RAISING TOTAL NUMBER PILLARS UNIVERSAL HOUSE JUSTICE TO ONE HUNDRED AND TEN. THREE IN AFRICA MALAGASY REPUBLIC REUNION SEYCHELLES THREE IN ASIA EAST PAKISTAN NEPAL SINGAPORE ONE IN AUSTRALASIA NORTHWEST PACIFIC OCEAN COMPRISING GUAM CAROLINES MARIANAS MARSHALLS TWO IN EUROPE ICELAND AND REPUBLIC IRELAND. FOUR OF THESE SEYCHELLES EAST PAKISTAN SINGAPORE NORTHWEST PACIFIC CONSTITUTE SUPPLEMENTARY ACHIEVEMENTS NINE YEAR PLAN. URGE PIONEERS SCHEDULED ALL THESE AREAS SETTLE POSTS WITHOUT DELAY. CALL UPON RESPECTIVE COMMUNITIES BRACE THEMSELVES EXERT SUPREME EFFORT FAST FLEETING WEEKS BEFORE COMING RIḌVÁN ESTABLISH AS MANY ASSEMBLIES AS POSSIBLE THEREBY BROADENING STRENGTHENING FOUNDATIONS PROJECTED NATIONAL INSTITUTIONS. FERVENTLY PRAYING HOLY SHRINES FOLLOWERS MOST GREAT NAME MAY SEIZE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES PRESENT HOUR AND SPARE NO EFFORT UNTIL GOALS PLAN ARE FULLY ACCOMPLISHED THEREBY ATTRACTING TO THEMSELVES AND THEIR COMMUNITIES INESTIMABLE BLESSINGS ANCIENT BEAUTY.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Warning against the Misuse of Recordings of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Voice
23 February 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

93.1 The advent and liberal supply of tape and cassette recorders in the markets of the world have opened new doors and placed in almost every land at the disposal of the friends new methods for the dissemination of Bahá’í material. It is the hope of the Universal House of Justice that the recording of Bahá’í talks, and other audio features, and their wide use among Bahá’ís and non-Bahá’ís alike, will prove to be a powerful new instrument in the teaching and deepening work everywhere. There is one area, however, where great care must be exercised, and this is in the use of the record of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's voice.

93.2 The Guardian, when referring to this record, requested the friends "to exercise restraint and caution." "In my view," he added, "it should be used only on special occasions and be listened to with the utmost reverence. The dignity of the Cause, I am sure, would suffer from too wide and indiscriminate use of one of the most precious relics of our departed Master."[1]

93.3 We request you to share the contents of this letter, in any manner you deem advisable, with the friends residing under your jurisdiction. We are confident that all the friends will strictly observe the Guardian's exhortation and will not overstep the bounds of courtesy and moderation in the use of a precious relic so lovingly left to us by the Center of God's Covenant.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Principles of Bahá’í Publishing
28 March 1971

To the National Spiritual Assemblies of the Bahá’í World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

94.1 Recognizing the need for a great increase in the provision of Bahá’í literature in all languages, we have reviewed the whole process of Bahá’í publishing including such matters as reviewing, standards of production, sales and distribution, relationships between National Spiritual Assemblies, the international needs of the teaching work and the position of Bahá’í authors. We are both to stimulate the supply of new works and to liberate the channels of publication and distribution. We wish to encourage Bahá’í authors as well as to promote production of the basic texts of the Faith.

94.2 We therefore ask you to study the attached memorandum yourselves, pass it on to your Publishing Trust and/or other agencies concerned, and make it available generally to the friends in whatever way you may find practicable.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


Memorandum on Bahá’í publishing―Riḍván 1971
94.3 The following principles and observations are called to the attention of National Spiritual Assemblies and all those concerned with the production of Bahá’í publications:

Reviewing
Obligatory

94.3a At this early stage of the Cause all works by Bahá’ís which deal with the Faith, whether in the form of books, pamphlets, translations, poems, songs, radio and television scripts, films, recordings, etc. must be approved before submission for publication, whether to a Bahá’í or non-Bahá’í publisher. In the case of material for purely local consumption the competent authority is the Local Spiritual Assembly, otherwise the National Spiritual Assembly (through its Reviewing Committee) is the approving authority.

A Temporary Measure

94.3b That this measure is both obligatory and temporary is borne out by the following statements of the Guardian:

They must supervise in these days when the Cause is still in its infancy all Bahá’í publications and translations, and provide in general for a dignified and accurate presentation of all Bahá’í literature and its distribution to the general public.
(Principles of Bahá’í Administration, pp. 38-39)
. . . the administration of the Cause . . . should guard against such rigidity as would clog and fetter the liberating forces released by His Revelation. . . . . . . the present restrictions imposed on the publication of Bahá’í literature will be definitely abolished; . . .
(The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 9)

Purpose of Review

94.3c The purpose of review is to protect the Faith from misrepresentation and to ensure dignity and accuracy in its presentation. In general the function of a Reviewing Committee is to say whether the work submitted gives an acceptable presentation of the Cause or not. Reviewers may win the gratitude and good will of authors by calling attention to such things as occasional grammatical or spelling errors, but approval should not be refused on such grounds; all such details are editorial matters for agreement between author and publisher.

Translations

94.3d As regards English, the beloved Guardian's translations are obviously the most authentic and should be used. If, for some particular reason, a Bahá’í author when quoting a passage of the Sacred Text which has been rendered into English by the Guardian, wishes to use a translation other than that made by the beloved Guardian, his request may be referred to the Universal House of Justice. Passages from the Sacred Text not translated by Shoghi Effendi, but already in English and published with approval, may be used. If an author wishes to make his own translation of a passage not already translated by Shoghi Effendi, the new translation may be submitted to the Universal House of Justice for approval.

94.3e With the exception of certain oriental languages such as Turkish, Arabic and Urdu, which are related to the original Persian or Arabic, new translations of the Sacred Text into languages other than English must be made from the Guardian's English translation where it exists. When there is no translation into English by Shoghi Effendi of a particular passage, the National Spiritual Assembly concerned should seek the advice of the Universal House of Justice. When translations already exist, which are not made from the Guardian's English text, but have been published and approved, they may be used.

Reviewing Committees

94.3f It is recommended that Reviewing Committees be small, composed of two or three believers with adequate education and knowledge of the Cause. It is essential that works submitted be dealt with promptly. The standards to be upheld by reviewers are the following: (a) conformity with the Teachings, (b) accuracy, (c) dignity in presentation. The Spiritual Assembly, on the basis of its Reviewing Committee's report, gives or withholds approval of the work.

Approval of Works Already Reviewed Elsewhere

94.3g While a National Spiritual Assembly intending to publish Bahá’í literature is encouraged to accept the review of another National Spiritual Assembly, it is not required to do so and has the right to review any work prior to authorizing its publication or republication by its own Publishing Trust or publisher in its area of jurisdiction. This does not apply to works by Hands of the Cause, which are reviewed in the Holy Land.

94.3h A National Spiritual Assembly which receives for approval a manuscript from outside its area of jurisdiction should inquire whether it has already been submitted for review elsewhere, and in the case of its having been refused approval, the reasons for such refusal.


Bahá’í Publishers
94.3i Bahá’í publishers may not publish any work about the Faith until it has been approved by the National Spiritual Assembly of the country where it is to be published.

94.3j Approval of a work imposes no obligation upon any Bahá’í publisher to publish it.

94.3k Whatever "house styles" Publishing Trusts and other Bahá’í publishers may adopt, transliteration of oriental terms into languages using the Roman alphabet must at present be according to the system chosen by the Guardian and described in volumes of The Bahá’í World.

Cables

94.3l Cables in English should be printed exactly as received, without interpolation.[1]

Editing

94.3m Bahá’í publishers, when accepting a work for publication, will make their own arrangements with the author on all such matters as accuracy of quotations, documentation, grammar and spelling, dates and even the rewriting of passages which the publisher may consider need improving, or he may ask the author to write additional material or to delete part of the original manuscript. Although such matters are entirely between the author and publisher, any addition, deletion or changes which affect the meaning must be submitted for review with the relative context.

Approval Notice

94.3n Although no Bahá’í work may be published without approval, it is not mandatory to print an approval notice in any publication.


Bahá’í Authors
94.3o Bahá’í authors should welcome review of their works, and can greatly assist promptness in review by supplying a sufficient number of copies of the manuscript for each member of the Reviewing Committee to have one.

94.3p Bahá’í authors may submit their works for review to any National Spiritual Assembly, and may send their works, once approved, to any publisher they like, Bahá’í or non-Bahá’í, at home or abroad. It should be remembered, however, that the approval should be given by the National Spiritual Assembly of the country where the work is to be first published. And in the case of a non-Bahá’í publisher the author should insist on use of the system of transliteration at present used by the Faith for languages employing the Roman alphabet.

94.3q It is hoped that Bahá’í authors will provide a constant stream of new works. Introductory books, commentaries, dissertations on various aspects of the Revelation, text books, histories, reviews, audio-visual material are all needed to stimulate study of the Faith and to promote the vital teaching work.


Sale and Distribution of Bahá’í Literature
94.3r

Bahá’í publications reviewed and published in one country may be sold or, offered for sale anywhere in the world. This includes the right of the publisher or the author to promote the sale of the publication in any legitimate manner including the right to advise the Bahá’ís in any country of its contents, price and availability. It does not include the right to insist that National Assemblies, their Publishing Trusts or Publishing Committees stock, promote or advertise the publication or offer it for sale. If any National Spiritual Assembly feels that a book would be damaging to the Faith in its country, it may represent this fact to the publisher and author and ask them not to promote it in that particular country. It is hoped that there will be great cooperation among those publishing Bahá’í literature, and Publishing Trusts are encouraged to supply to believers, the book trade and libraries, all Bahá’í publications from any country.
Believers should not be prevented from purchasing Bahá’í books reviewed and published in other countries.
National Spiritual Assemblies are not obliged to furnish mailing lists of believers to publishers, but publishers may compile their own mailing lists and use them for the announcement and promotion of sale of their Bahá’í books and literature.
Five copies of every new book and every new edition (not reprints) should be sent to the World Center.[2]



/*chapter*/Call for Deepening on the Significance of the Formative Age
15 April 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

95.1 Our Riḍván message this year[1] called attention to the impending fiftieth anniversary of the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, "an event which signalized at once the end of the Heroic Age of our Faith, the opening of the Formative Age and the birth of the Administrative Order, the nucleus and pattern of the World Order of Bahá’u’lláh."

95.2 We now call upon all National Spiritual Assemblies to formulate and implement plans designed to educate the friends everywhere in their understanding of the significance of the Formative Age of our Faith. As an aid to this program we attach extracts from the writings of the beloved Guardian on this general theme, and we suggest that these and similar excerpts from the Writings be studied and expounded at the forthcoming Summer Schools, at special sessions of Teaching Institutes, at conferences of the friends, and indeed on any occasions which you may deem suitable.

95.3 We leave it to you to use the wonderful material bequeathed to us by the beloved Guardian on this theme in whatever manner you deem best for your own communities. The study and understanding of this subject will immensely strengthen the faith of the believers as well as their ability to present the message to a waiting world.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE




Extracts from the Writings of Shoghi Effendi on the Significance of the Formative Age of our Faith
April 1971
95.4 The passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, so sudden in the circumstances which caused it, so dramatic in its consequences, could neither impede the operation of such a dynamic force nor obscure its purpose. Those fervid appeals, embodied in the Will and Testament of a departed Master, could not but confirm its aim, define its character and reinforce the promise of its ultimate success.

95.5 Out of the pangs of anguish which His bereaved followers have suffered, amid the heat and dust which the attacks launched by a sleepless enemy had precipitated, the Administration of Bahá’u’lláh's invincible Faith was born. The potent energies released through the ascension of the Center of His Covenant crystallized into this supreme, this infallible Organ for the accomplishment of a Divine Purpose. The Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá unveiled its character, reaffirmed its basis, supplemented its principles, asserted its indispensability, and enumerated its chief institutions. . . .

"America and the Most Great Peace"―21 April 1933, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh: Selected Letters, rev. ed. (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1982), p. 89.
95.6 With ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's ascension, and more particularly with the passing of His well-beloved and illustrious sister the Most Exalted Leaf[2]―the last survivor of a glorious and heroic age―there draws to a close the first and most moving chapter of Bahá’í history, marking the conclusion of the Primitive, the Apostolic Age of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh.[3] It was ‘Abdu’l-Bahá Who, through the provisions of His weighty Will and Testament, has forged the vital link which must for ever connect the age that has just expired with the one we now live in―the Transitional and Formative period of the Faith―a stage that must in the fullness of time reach its blossom and yield its fruit in the exploits and triumphs that are to herald the Golden Age of the Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh.

95.7 Dearly beloved friends! The onrushing forces so miraculously released through the agency of two independent and swiftly successive Manifestations are now under our very eyes and through the care of the chosen stewards of a far-flung Faith being gradually mustered and disciplined. They are slowly crystallizing into institutions that will come to be regarded as the hallmark and glory of the age we are called upon to establish and by our deeds immortalize. For upon our present-day efforts, and above all upon the extent to which we strive to remodel our lives after the pattern of sublime heroism associated with those gone before us, must depend the efficacy of the instruments we now fashion―instruments that must erect the structure of that blissful Commonwealth which must signalize the Golden Age of our Faith.[4]

"The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh"―8 February 1934, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 98.
95.8 ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Who incarnates an institution for which we can find no parallel whatsoever in any of the world's recognized religious systems, may be said to have closed the Age to which He Himself belonged and opened the one in which we are now laboring. His Will and Testament should thus be regarded as the perpetual, the indissoluble link which the mind of Him Who is the Mystery of God has conceived in order to insure the continuity of the three ages[5] that constitute the component parts of the Bahá’í Dispensation. The period in which the seed of the Faith had been slowly germinating is thus intertwined both with the one which must witness its efflorescence and the subsequent age in which that seed will have finally yielded its golden fruit.

95.9 The creative energies released by the Law of Bahá’u’lláh, permeating and evolving within the mind of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá have, by their very impact and close interaction, given birth to an Instrument which may be viewed as the Charter of the New World Order which is at once the glory and the promise of this most great Dispensation. The Will may thus be acclaimed as the inevitable offspring resulting from that mystic intercourse between Him Who communicated the generating influence of His divine Purpose and the One Who was its vehicle and chosen recipient. Being the Child of the Covenant―the Heir of both the Originator and the Interpreter of the Law of God―the Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá can no more be divorced from Him Who supplied the original and motivating impulse than from the One Who ultimately conceived it. Bahá’u’lláh's inscrutable purpose, we must ever bear in mind, has been so thoroughly infused into the conduct of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, and their motives have been so closely wedded together, that the mere attempt to dissociate the teachings of the former from any system which the ideal Exemplar of those same teachings has established would amount to a repudiation of one of the most sacred and basic truths of the Faith.

95.10 The Administrative Order, which ever since ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's ascension has evolved and is taking shape under our very eyes in no fewer than forty countries of the world, may be considered as the framework of the Will itself, the inviolable stronghold wherein this new-born child is being nurtured and developed. This Administrative Order, as it expands and consolidates itself, will no doubt manifest the potentialities and reveal the full implications of this momentous Document―this most remarkable expression of the Will of One of the most remarkable Figures of the Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh. It will, as its component parts, its organic institutions, begin to function with efficiency and vigor, assert its claim and demonstrate its capacity to be regarded not only as the nucleus but the very pattern of the New World Order destined to embrace in the fullness of time the whole of mankind.

"The Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh―8 February 1934, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, pp. 143-44.
95.11 Dearly beloved friends: Though the Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh has been delivered, the World Order which such a Revelation must needs beget is as yet unborn. Though the Heroic Age of His Faith is passed, the creative energies which that Age has released have not as yet crystallized into that world society which, in the fullness of time, is to mirror forth the brightness of His glory. Though the framework of His Administrative Order has been erected, and the Formative Period of the Bahá’í Era has begun, yet the promised Kingdom into which the seed of His institutions must ripen remains as yet uninaugurated. . . .

95.12 "The heights," Bahá’u’lláh Himself testifies, "which, through the most gracious favor of God, mortal man can attain in this Day are as yet unrevealed to his sight. The world of being hath never had, nor doth it yet possess, the capacity for such a revelation. The day, however, is approaching when the potentialities of so great a favor will, by virtue of His behest, be manifested unto men."

95.13 For the revelation of so great a favor a period of intense turmoil and wide-spread suffering would seem to be indispensable. Resplendent as has been the Age that has witnessed the inception of the Mission with which Bahá’u’lláh has been entrusted, the interval which must elapse ere that Age yields its choicest fruit must, it is becoming increasingly apparent, be overshadowed by such moral and social gloom as can alone prepare an unrepentant humanity for the prize she is destined to inherit . . .

95.14 As we view the world around us, we are compelled to observe the manifold evidences of that universal fermentation which, in every continent of the globe and in every department of human life, be it religious, social, economic or political, is purging and reshaping humanity in anticipation of the Day when the wholeness of the human race will have been recognized and its unity established. A twofold process, however, can be distinguished, each tending, in its own way and with an accelerated momentum, to bring to a climax the forces that are transforming the face of our planet. The first is essentially an integrating process, while the second is fundamentally disruptive. The former, as it steadily evolves, unfolds a System which may well serve as a pattern for that world polity towards which a strangely disordered world is continually advancing; while the latter, as its disintegrating influence deepens, tends to tear down, with increasing violence, the antiquated barriers that seek to block humanity's progress towards its destined goal. The constructive process stands associated with the nascent Faith of Bahá’u’lláh, and is the harbinger of the New World Order that Faith must erelong establish. The destructive forces that characterize the other should be identified with a civilization that has refused to answer to the expectation of a new age, and is consequently falling into chaos and decline.

95.15 A titanic, a spiritual struggle, unparalleled in its magnitude yet unspeakably glorious in its ultimate consequences, is being waged as a result of these opposing tendencies, in this age of transition through which the organized community of the followers of Bahá’u’lláh and mankind as a whole are passing. . . .

95.16 It is not my purpose to call to mind, much less to attempt a detailed analysis of, the spiritual struggles that have ensued, or to note the victories that have redounded to the glory of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh since the day of its foundation. My chief concern is not with the happenings that have distinguished the First, the Apostolic Age of the Bahá’í Dispensation, but rather with the outstanding events that are transpiring in, and the tendencies which characterize, the formative period of its development, this Age of Transition, whose tribulations are the precursors of that Era of blissful felicity which is to incarnate God's ultimate purpose for all mankind.

"The Unfoldment of World Civilization"―11 March 1936, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, pp. 168-71.
95.17 The moment had now arrived for that undying, that world-vitalizing Spirit that was born in Shiraz, that had been rekindled in Tihran, that had been fanned into flame in Baghdad and Adrianople, that had been carried to the West, and was now illuminating the fringes of five continents, to incarnate itself in institutions designed to canalize its outspreading energies and stimulate its growth. The Age that had witnessed the birth and rise of the Faith had now closed. The Heroic, the Apostolic Age of the Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh, that primitive period in which its Founders had lived, in which its life had been generated, in which its greatest heroes had struggled and quaffed the cup of martyrdom, and its pristine foundations been established―a period whose splendors no victories in this or any future age, however brilliant, can rival―had now terminated with the passing of One Whose mission may be regarded as the link binding the Age in which the seed of the new-born Message had been incubating and those which are destined to witness its efflorescence and ultimate fruition.

95.18 The Formative Period, the Iron Age, of that Dispensation was now beginning, the Age in which the institutions, local, national and international, of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh were to take shape, develop and become fully consolidated, in anticipation of the third, the last, the Golden Age destined to witness the emergence of a world-embracing Order enshrining the ultimate fruit of God's latest Revelation to mankind, a fruit whose maturity must signalize the establishment of a world civilization and the formal inauguration of the Kingdom of the Father upon earth as promised by Jesus Christ Himself. . . .

95.19 The last twenty-three years of the first Bahá’í century may thus be regarded as the initial stage of the Formative Period of the Faith, an Age of Transition to be identified with the rise and establishment of the Administrative Order, upon which the institutions of the future Bahá’í World Commonwealth must needs be ultimately erected in the Golden Age that must witness the consummation of the Bahá’í Dispensation. The Charter which called into being, outlined the features and set in motion the processes of, this Administrative Order is none other than the Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, His greatest legacy to posterity, the brightest emanation of His mind and the mightiest instrument forged to insure the continuity of the three ages which constitute the component parts of His Father's Dispensation. . . .

95.20 The Administrative Order which this historic Document has established, it should be noted, is, by virtue of its origin and character, unique in the annals of the world's religious systems. . . .

95.21 The Document establishing that Order, the Charter of a future world civilization, which may be regarded in some of its features as supplementary to no less weighty a Book than the Kitáb-i-Aqdas; . . .

God Passes By, rev. ed. (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1987), pp. 324-28.
95.22 The first seventy-seven years of the preceding century, constituting the Apostolic and Heroic Age of our Faith, fell into three distinct epochs, of nine, of thirty-nine and of twenty-nine years' duration, associated respectively with the Bábí Dispensation and the Ministries of Bahá’u’lláh and of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá.[6] This Primitive Age of the Bahá’í Era, unapproached in spiritual fecundity by any period associated with the mission of the Founder of any previous Dispensation, was impregnated, from its inception to its termination, with the creative energies generated through the advent of two independent Manifestations and the establishment of a Covenant unique in the spiritual annals of mankind.

95.23 The last twenty-three years[7] of that same century coincided with the first epoch of the second, the Iron and Formative, Age of the Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh―the first of a series of epochs which must precede the inception of the last and Golden Age of that Dispensation―a Dispensation which, as the Author of the Faith has Himself categorically asserted, must extend over a period of no less than one thousand years, and which will constitute the first stage in a series of Dispensations, to be established by future Manifestations, all deriving their inspiration from the Author of the Bahá’í Revelation, and destined to last, in their aggregate, no less than five thousand centuries. . . .

95.24 During this Formative Age of the Faith, and in the course of present and succeeding epochs, the last and crowning stage in the erection of the framework of the Administrative Order of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh―the election of the Universal House of Justice―will have been completed, the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, the Mother-Book of His Revelation, will have been codified and its laws promulgated, the Lesser Peace will have been established, the unity of mankind will have been achieved and its maturity attained, the Plan conceived by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá will have been executed, the emancipation of the Faith from the fetters of religious orthodoxy will have been effected, and its independent religious status will have been universally recognized, whilst in the course of the Golden Age, destined to consummate the Dispensation itself, the banner of the Most Great Peace, promised by its Author, will have been unfurled, the World Bahá’í Commonwealth will have emerged in the plenitude of its power and splendor, and the birth and efflorescence of a world civilization, the child of that Peace, will have conferred its inestimable blessings upon all mankind.

"The Challenging Requirements of the Present Hour"―5 June 1947, Citadel of Faith: Messages to America 1947-1957 (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1980), pp. 4-6.



/*chapter*/Message to the Caribbean Conference―May 1971
May 1971

To the Friends of God gathered in the Caribbean Conference

Warmest greetings!

97.1 How propitious that on its mountaintop between the two greatest oceans and the two American continents the Mother Temple of Latin America is rising now in Panama, a land blessed by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's prophecy that "in the future it will gain most great importance."[1] How splendid that the vision projected in the Divine Plan for the Americas has sprung into such vibrant life in this Caribbean basin, in country after country upon its verdant shores, in island after island across its expanse, all named by the Master in His Tablets. What shall we not witness erelong in these places so charged with destiny through the Master's utterances!

97.2 The Nine Year Plan, the current stage in the unfoldment of the Divine Plan of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, is approaching its triumphant end. This Conference is an occasion to sum up what has been won, to determine to achieve the remaining goals for expansion in these blessed lands, and to consolidate the old and new communities of the Most Great Name. Indeed, the winning of our grand Bahá’í objectives began just yesterday when, in the early years of the Formative Age, a few travellers crossed the Caribbean. Yet it was not until the successive Plans of the beloved Guardian, culminating in the Ten Year Crusade, when 27 Knights of Bahá’u’lláh settled throughout this vast area, that the Cause took firm root. By 1963 the countries and islands of the Caribbean claimed less than 400 localities and only 147 Local Spiritual Assemblies. Now Bahá’ís are to be found in over 2,500 localities, more than 500 Local Assemblies and 16 National Spiritual Assemblies have been formed, and there have been hundreds of concrete achievements which have brought about our recognition as an independent Faith.

97.3 The Americas have been a melting pot and a meeting place for the races of men, and the need is acute for the fulfillment of Gods promises of the realization of the oneness of mankind. Particularly do the Master and the Guardian point to the Afro-Americans and the Amerindians, two great ethnic groups whose spiritual powers will be released through their response to the Creative Word. But our Teachings must touch all, must include all peoples. And, in this hour of your tireless activity, what special rewards shall come to those who will arise, summoned by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Words: "Now is the time for you to divest yourselves of the garment of attachment to this world that perisheth, to be wholly severed from the physical world, become heavenly angels, and travel to these countries."[2]

97.4 The time is short, the needs many. No effort can be foregone, no opportunity wasted. Praised be God that you have gathered in this Conference to consult upon the vital requirements of this highly significant moment. Our prayers ascend at the Holy Threshold that every session of this historic meeting will attract Divine Blessings, and that each soul, armed with the love of God and imbued with His purpose for a struggling mankind, will arise to activate, beyond all present hopes, the vast spiritual potentialities of the Americas.

97.5 To each of you we send our deepest love.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to the South Pacific Oceanic Conference―May 1971
May 1971

To the Friends of God assembled in the Conference of the South Pacific Ocean

Dearly loved Friends,

98.1 We send our warmest greetings and deepest love on the occasion of the first Conference in the heart of the Pacific Ocean. Praise be to God that you have gathered to consult on the vital needs of the hour!

98.2 Recalling the promise of Bahá’u’lláh "Should they attempt to conceal His light on the continent, He will assuredly rear His head in the midmost heart of the ocean and, raising His voice, proclaim: 'I am the lifegiver of the world!'"[1] witness its fulfillment in the vast area of the Pacific Ocean, in island after island mentioned by the Master in the Tablets of the Divine Plan.[2] How great is the potential for the Faith in localities blessed by these references!

98.3 At the inception of the Formative Age,[3] was little known here. Agnes Alexander had brought the Teachings to the Hawaiian Islands. Father and Mother Dunn had only recently arrived in Australia. Later the name of Martha Root was to be emblazoned across the Pacific.[4], at the beginning of the Ten Year Crusade, a vanguard of twenty-one Knights of Bahá’u’lláh raised His call as they settled in the islands of this great Ocean. The names of these valiant souls, together with the names of the army of pioneers and teachers who followed, will be forever enshrined in the annals of the Faith.

98.4 Their mighty endeavors brought about the enrollment of thousands of the peoples of Polynesia, Micronesia and Melanesia under the banner of the Most Great Name, the opening in Australasia of more than 800 centers and the establishment of ten pillars of the Universal House of Justice.[5] We can but marvel at such triumphs attained despite great difficulties imposed by the vast expanse of ocean separating the island communities, especially when it is recalled that in many of these islands even the Christian Gospel was unknown as late as the 1830s.

98.5 How great is the responsibility to continue spreading the Word of God throughout the Pacific. It was in the Tablets of the Divine Plan that ‘Abdu’l-Bahá called for teachers "speaking their languages, severed, holy, sanctified and filled with the love of God," to "turn their faces to and travel through the three great Island groups of the Pacific Ocean―Polynesia, Micronesia and Melanesia . . . With hearts overflowing with the love of God, with tongues commemorating the mention of God" to "deliver the Glad Tidings of the manifestation of the Lord of Hosts to all the people."[6]

98.6 The Nine Year Plan, the current phase of the unfoldment of the Divine Plan, is now approaching its final stages. It is incumbent on the friends to assess what has been accomplished and to anticipate and plan for such rapid acceleration of the teaching and consolidation work as is necessary to win all goals by 1973. Time is short; the needs critical. No effort must be spared; no opportunity overlooked.

98.7 Our prayers ascend at the Holy Threshold that every session of this historic meeting will attract Divine blessings, and that the friends will go forth, armed with the love of God and enthusiasm born of the Spirit, fully prepared to scale the heights of victory!

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Commemoration of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
12 July 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

99.1 We have noted with deep satisfaction that some National Spiritual Assemblies have already initiated plans to befittingly commemorate the Fiftieth Anniversary of the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and the inception of the Formative Age of the Bahá’í Dispensation.[1]

99.2 We feel it would be highly fitting for the three days, 26 to 28 November, during which the Day of the Covenant and the Anniversary of the Ascension of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá occur, to be set aside this year by all National Spiritual Assemblies for specially arranged gatherings and conferences, convened either nationally or locally or both, on the three following main themes: The Bahá’í Covenant, The Formative Age, and The Life of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá.

99.3 We hope that these gatherings will serve to intensify the consecration of the workers in the Divine Vineyard in every land, and provide them with the opportunity, especially in the watches of the night of that Ascension, when they will be commemorating the passing hour of our Beloved Master, to renew their pledge to Bahá’u’lláh and to rededicate themselves to the accomplishment of the as yet unfulfilled goals of the Nine Year Plan.

99.4 The Hands of the Cause in the Holy Land, the members of the Universal House of Justice, and all resident and visiting believers at the World Center will, on that memory-laden night, visit the Shrine of that Mystery of God on behalf of the entire Community of the Blessed Beauty and will supplicate for the stalwart champions of the Faith laboring in the forefront of so many fields of service and winning fresh triumphs in His Name, for the self-sacrificing believers without whose support and sustained assistance most of these victories could not be achieved, and for those who will be inspired to join the ranks of the active and dedicated promoters of His glorious Cause at this crucial stage in the development of the Plan, that we may all meet our obligations and discharge our sacred trust, thus making it possible in the latter months of the Plan for our entire resources to be devoted to an even greater expansion of the Faith in its onward march towards the spiritual conquest of the planet.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to the North Pacific Oceanic Conference―September 1971
September 1971

To the Friends of God assembled in the Conference of the North Pacific Ocean

Dearly loved Friends,

100.1 On the eve of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the opening of the Formative Age of our Faith we call to mind the high hopes often expressed by the beloved Master for the spread of the Cause in this region, His mention in the Tablets of the Divine Plan of many of the territories represented in this Conference, and the faithful and devoted services of that maidservant of Bahá’u’lláh, the Hand of the Cause Agnes Alexander, who brought the Teachings to these shores in the early years of this century.[1]

100.2 In these days we are witnessing an unprecedented acceleration of the teaching work in almost every part of the globe. In the North Pacific Ocean area great strides have been made in the advancement of the Cause since that historic Asia Regional Teaching Conference in Nikko just sixteen years ago. The next two years witnessed the formation of the National Spiritual Assembly of Alaska and of the Regional National Spiritual Assembly of North East Asia. To the Convention in Tokyo at Riḍván 1957 the Guardian addressed these prophetic words:

100.2a This auspicious event, which posterity will regard as the culmination of a process initiated, half a century ago, in the capital city of Japan, . . . marks the opening of the second chapter in the history of the evolution of His Faith in the North Pacific area. Such a consummation cannot fail to lend a tremendous impetus to its onward march in the entire Pacific Ocean . . .
100.3 Since that time National Spiritual Assemblies have also been firmly established in Korea and Taiwan.

100.4 Hokkaido, the site of this Conference, first heard of the Teachings less than fifteen years ago, and the first aboriginal peoples of this land accepted Bahá’u’lláh just over a decade ago. Now you are the witnesses to the beginnings of a rapid increase in the number of believers. Peoples in other islands and lands of the North Pacific, including the Ryukyus, Guam, the Trust Territories, the western shores of Canada and Alaska and the Aleutians are also enrolling under the banner of the Most Great Name, and next Riḍván yet another pillar of the Universal House of Justice is to be raised in Micronesia. We are heartened at the prospect that from the indigenous peoples of this vast oceanic area―the Ainu, the Japanese, the Chinese, the Koreans, the Okinawans, the Micronesians, the American Indians, the Eskimos, and the Aleuts―vast numbers will soon enter the Faith.

100.5 The final hours of the Nine Year Plan are fast fleeting. Praise be to God that you have gathered to consult on ways and means of assuring complete victory so that from these outposts the Teachings may spread to those nearby lands where teeming millions have not as yet heard of the advent of this Most Great Dispensation.

100.6 The sweet perfume of victory is in the air, and we must hasten to achieve it while there is yet time. Vital goals, particularly on the homefronts of Taiwan and Japan, remain to be won, and everywhere the roots of the faith of the believers must sink deeper and deeper into the firm earth of the Teachings lest tempests and trials as yet unforeseen shake or uproot the tender plants so lovingly raised in the islands of this great Ocean and the lands surrounding it.

100.7 As you and the friends in the sister Conference in Reykjavik bring this series of eight Oceanic and Continental Conferences to a triumphant close, our prayers for the success of your deliberations ascend at the Holy Threshold. May God grant you the resources, the strength, and the determination to attain your highest hopes, and enable you to open a new and glorious chapter in the evolution of His Faith in the North Pacific area.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to the North Atlantic Conference―September 1971
September 1971

To the Friends assembled in the North Atlantic Conference in Reykjavik

Dearly loved Friends,

101.1 To each and every one of you in this historic Conference we send our most cordial and loving greetings. The famous island in which you are now gathered, so strategically placed between the two great continents flanking the vast oceanic area which surrounds it, to which the Teachings of Christ were brought a millennium ago, and which, in this Dispensation, was mentioned by the Center of the Covenant in His Tablets of the Divine Plan,[1] first heard the Name of Bahá’u’lláh in 1924 when the Hand of the Cause Amelia Collins stopped briefly in Reykjavik and made the acquaintance of Hólmfríður Árnadóttir who subsequently became the first Bahá’í of Iceland. Eleven years later the beloved Martha Root spent a month in this land which she loved so well. On that occasion, with the help of Hólmfríður, the Cause of Bahá’u’lláh was widely proclaimed in the press, on the radio and from the lecture platform.

101.2 The great Ocean extending from the equator to the Pole and from Europe to North America, which has been both the barrier and the link between the Old and the New Worlds, has played a highly significant part in the later history of mankind. Long before Columbus arrived in the West Indies the Vikings, forebears of Icelanders of today, were plying its northern waters. In later centuries wave upon wave of Europeans sailed from east to west, engaging in one of the most significant migrations in human history. In the twentieth century ‘Abdu’l-Bahá Himself sailed across it and back, a voyage unique in the religious history of mankind and creating a remarkable parallel with the Light of the Cause itself, beaming from the East across the great Ocean to the heart of the North American Continent, being reflected back again, firing new beacon lights in Europe and in later years diffusing its radiance throughout the world. The great Republic[2] whose eastern shore forms part of the boundary of this Ocean has become the Cradle of the Administrative Order and at this present time the banner of the Most Great Name is being raised in island after island of this Ocean, two of which―Iceland and Ireland―will raise, next Riḍván, new pillars of the Universal House of Justice.

101.3 The Faith of God is flourishing in the lands around the North Atlantic; a new wind is blowing, promoting an upsurge of proclamation and teaching. In Europe the youth are afire with enthusiasm and vigor. In Canada and the United States a ground swell of unknown proportions is carrying Bahá’í communities to heights of unprecedented achievement.

101.4 You are gathered in this Conference to consult on ways and means of winning, in the few fleeting months ahead, the remaining goals of the Nine Year Plan. In Europe particularly there is much to be done, but we have full faith that the friends, galvanized by their love for Bahá’u’lláh and fortified by His promises of Divine assistance, will, with, the enthusiasm which they already display, commit their resources to the tasks ahead and will surely attain the victory.

101.5 The beloved Master prayed that holy souls would arise from the Northern Territories of the West and become signs of God's guidance and standards of the Supreme Concourse. In one of the Tablets of the Divine Plan He refers to an inhospitable island of that area saying:

101.5a Should the fire of the love of God be kindled in Greenland, all the ice of that country will be melted, and its cold weather become temperate―that is, if the hearts be touched with the heat of the love of God, that territory will become a divine rose garden and a heavenly paradise, and the souls, even as fruitful trees, will acquire the utmost freshness and beauty. Effort, the utmost effort is required. . . .[3]
101.6 As the friends gathered in Reykjavik and Sapporo bring this worldwide series of Oceanic and Continental Conferences to a triumphant close our thoughts are with you and our prayers on your behalf rise from the Sacred Threshold. May untold blessings and confirmations be showered upon you as you go forth to labor for the advancement of the Cause of God and may your brows be crowned with victory.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Músá Banání
5 September 1971

To the Hands of the Cause of God, the Continental Boards of Counselors, the National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

102.1 The Hand of the Cause Músá Banání passed to the Abhá Kingdom at noon on Saturday, 4 September. The following cable was sent by the Universal House of Justice:

102.1a PROFOUNDLY MOURN PASSING DEARLY LOVED HAND CAUSE MÚSÁ BANÁNÍ RECALL WITH DEEP AFFECTION HIS SELFLESS UNASSUMING PROLONGED SERVICES CRADLE FAITH HIS EXEMPLARY PIONEERING UGANDA CULMINATING HIS APPOINTMENT AS HAND CAUSE AFRICA AND PRAISE BELOVED GUARDIAN AS SPIRITUAL CONQUEROR THAT CONTINENT.[1] INTERMENT HIS REMAINS AFRICAN SOIL UNDER SHADOW MOTHER TEMPLE ENHANCES SPIRITUAL LUSTRE THAT BLESSED SPOT. FERVENTLY PRAYING SHRINES PROGRESS HIS NOBLE SOUL. MAY AFRICA NOW ROBBED STAUNCH VENERABLE PROMOTER DEFENDER FAITH FOLLOW HIS EXAMPLE CHEER HIS HEART ABHÁ KINGDOM. CONVEY FAMILY MOST TENDER SYMPATHIES ADVISE HOLD MEMORIAL MEETINGS ALL COMMUNITIES BAHÁ’Í WORLD BEFITTING GATHERINGS MOTHER TEMPLES. WITH LOVING BAHÁ’Í GREETINGS,
UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Spiritual Character of Bahá’í Elections
11 November 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

103.1 A compilation has been made from the writings of the beloved Guardian about the spiritual character of Bahá’í elections.[1] We are sharing these extracts with you to bring to the attention of the friends under your jurisdiction in any manner you deem advisable.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Formation of Thirteen New National Spiritual Assemblies during Riḍván 1972
7 December 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

104.1 HAPPY ANNOUNCE DECISION ADD RWANDA LIST NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES TO BE FORMED NEXT RIḌVÁN. REPRESENTATIVES HOUSE JUSTICE FIRST CONVENTIONS AS FOLLOWS HANDS CAUSE AMATU’L-BAHÁ RÚḤÍYYIH KHÁNUM WINDWARD ISLANDS UGO GIACHERY PUERTO RICO ‘ALÍ-AKBAR FURÚTAN NEPAL SHU‘A‘U’LLÁH ‘ALÁ’Í EAST PAKISTAN ADELBERT MÜHLSCHLEGEL RWANDA SEYCHELLES JALÁL KHÁZEH SINGAPORE ENOCH OLINGA ICELAND WILLIAM SEARS IRELAND COLLIS FEATHERSTONE NORTHWEST PACIFIC RAḤMATU’LLÁH MUHÁJIR MALAGASY REPUBLIC RÉUNION COUNSELLOR HÁDÍ RAḤMÁNÍ AFGHANISTAN. PRAYING SHRINES OUTSTANDING SUCCESS THESE HISTORIC GATHERINGS ELECTING MEMBERS NEW PILLARS HOUSE JUSTICE FOCAL CENTERS SPIRITUAL INVIGORATION ILLUMINATION NEWLY EMERGING NATIONAL COMMUNITIES.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/World Center Developments―Erection of Obelisk and Extension of Gardens
13 December 1971

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

105.1 JOYOUSLY ANNOUNCE FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS WORLD CENTER. AFTER MANY YEARS DIFFICULT NEGOTIATIONS ERECTION OBELISK MARKING SITE FUTURE MASHRIQU’L-ADHKÁR MOUNT CARMEL COMPLETED THUS FULFILLING PROJECT INITIATED BELOVED GUARDIAN EARLY YEARS CRUSADE. GARDENS BAHJÍ HAIFA EXTENDED BY DEVELOPMENT QUADRANT SOUTHEAST MANSION BAHÁ’U’LLÁH AND ESTABLISHMENT FORMAL GARDEN SOUTHWEST CORNER PROPERTY SURROUNDING SHRINE BÁB.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Surpassing the Nine Year Plan goal for the Number of Bahá’í localities
14 February 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

106.1 OVERJOYED ANNOUNCE FRIENDS EVERY LAND NUMBER LOCALITIES NOW 56645 EXCEEDING BY OVER 2500 ORIGINAL GOAL NINE YEAR PLAN. OFFERING PRAYERS THANKSGIVING SACRED THRESHOLD FOR DIVINE BOUNTIES SURROUNDING SACRIFICIAL EFFORTS LOVE-INTOXICATED SUPPORTERS HIS BLESSED NAME. URGE BELIEVERS THOSE AREAS WHOSE TEACHING GOALS ARE STILL OUTSTANDING EXERT UTMOST EFFORT COURSE SWIFTLY PASSING REMAINING MONTHS PLAN WIN THEIR GOALS ENABLING THEM JOIN RANKS THEIR VICTORIOUS BRETHREN WHO ARE URGED CONTINUE THEIR VIGOROUS BRILLIANT EXPLOITS IN SERVICE GOD'S INFINITELY GLORIOUS CAUSE.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Music and Singing
1 March 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

107.1 In these days when music and singing are playing such an important and effective part in the teaching work, we feel it appropriate and timely to share with you the enclosed compilation of extracts from the Writings of our Faith on the subject.[1]

107.2 We leave it to your discretion to decide in which manner and to what extent to share the attached extracts with the friends and communities under your jurisdiction.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Dedication of the Mother Temple of Latin America, Panama City, Panama
19 March 1972

To the Beloved of God gathered in the Conference called on the occasion of the Dedication of the Mother Temple of Latin America

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

108.1 With praise and gratitude to God the whole Bahá’í world acclaims the dedication of the Mother Temple of Latin America, an edifice which glorifies the Cause of Bahá’u’lláh at that point where, the beloved Master asserted, "the Occident and the Orient find each other united through the Panama Canal," where "The teachings, once established . . ., will unite the East and the West, the North and the South."[1]

108.2 This historic project, in a hemisphere of infinite spiritual potentiality, fulfils one of the most important goals of the Nine Year Plan, and brings untold joy to the hearts of the friends in every land. Privileged are they who share in the raising of this glorious Silent Teacher with deeds of loving generosity and sacrifice. A crown to the labors of all those who have striven to establish the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh in Latin America, this Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs, the rallying point for the Bahá’ís of those lands, whether they are of the blessed Indian peoples or represent the other races whose diversity enriches the nations of that hemisphere, will be a fountainhead of spiritual confirmations, and this mighty achievement will endow the Bahá’í Community with new and greater capacities, enabling the friends in Latin America, and particularly in this privileged land of Panama, to win victories that will eclipse all their past achievements.

108.3 The threefold task to which your attention is now directed comprises the proclamation, expansion and consolidation of the Faith. We urge you to concentrate your deliberations not only on the exchange of ideas for the prosecution of this task, but on ways and means for fostering collaboration among the Bahá’í Communities of Central and South America so that the most fruitful harvest may be gathered in all three aspects of the teaching work and enable you to achieve your remaining goals of the Nine Year Plan.

108.4 Our loving, ardent prayers will be offered at the Sacred Threshold, that the Almighty may inspire your discussions in this historic Conference and crown all your efforts with victory.[2]

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Bahá’í Schools and Institutes
10 April 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

109.1 In view of the increasing importance of Bahá’í summer schools, a number of excerpts from the writings of the beloved Guardian have been compiled which set forth objectives to be attained by and principles underlying the operation of this institution.[1] Many of these objectives and principles apply to Teaching Institutes, and a section of quotations from the Universal House of Justice on these Institutes is included.

109.2 We share these extracts with the friends in the hope that they will be assisted and guided in the development of these vital institutions of the Faith.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Elucidation of the Nature of the Continental Boards of Counselors
24 April 1972

To the Continental Boards of Counselors and National Spiritual Assemblies

Beloved Friends,

111.1 Recently we have received queries from several sources about the nature of the Institution of the Continental Boards of Counselors and its relationship to the Institution of the Hands of the Cause, and we feel it is timely for us to give further elucidation.

111.2 As with so many aspects of the Administrative Order, understanding of this subject will develop and clarify with the passage of time as that Order grows organically in response to the power and guidance of Almighty God and in accordance with the needs of a rapidly developing worldwide community. However, certain aspects are already so clear as to require a proper understanding by the friends.


The Rulers and the Learned

111.3 In the Kitáb-i-‘Ahdí (the Book of His Covenant) Bahá’u’lláh wrote "Blessed are the rulers and the learned among the people of Bahá,"[1] and referring to this very passage the beloved Guardian wrote on 4 November 1931:

111.3a In this holy cycle the "learned" are, on the one hand, the Hands of the Cause of God, and, on the other, the teachers and diffusers of His teachings who do not rank as Hands, but who have attained an eminent position in the teaching work. As to the "rulers" they refer to the members of the Local, National and International Houses of Justice. The duties of each of these souls will be determined in the future.
(Translated from the Persian)

The Learned

111.4 The Hands of the Cause of God, the Counselors and the members of the Auxiliary Boards fall within the definition of the "learned" given by the beloved Guardian. Thus they are all intimately interrelated and it is not incorrect to refer to the three ranks collectively as one institution.

111.5 However, each is also a separate institution in itself. The Institution of the Hands of the Cause of God was brought into existence in the time of Bahá’u’lláh and when the Administrative Order was proclaimed and formally established by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in His Will, it became an auxiliary institution of the Guardianship. The Auxiliary Boards, in their turn, were brought into being by Shoghi Effendi as an auxiliary institution of the Hands of the Cause.

111.6 When, following the passing of Shoghi Effendi, the Universal House of Justice decided that it could not legislate to make possible the appointment of further Hands of the Cause, it became necessary for it to create a new institution, appointed by itself, to extend into the future the functions of protection and propagation vested in the Hands of the Cause and, with that in view, so to develop the Institution of the Hands that it could nurture the new institution and function in close collaboration with it as long as possible. It was also vital so to arrange matters as to make the most effective use of the unique services of the Hands themselves.

111.7 The first step in this development was taken in November 1964 when the Universal House of Justice formally related the Institution of the Hands to itself by stating that "Responsibility for decisions on matters of general policy affecting the institution of the Hands of the Cause, which was formerly exercised by the beloved Guardian, now devolves upon the Universal House of Justice as the supreme and central institution of the Faith to which all must turn." At that time the number of members of the Auxiliary Boards was increased from 72 to 135, and the Hands of the Cause in each continent were called upon to appoint one or more members of their Auxiliary Boards to act in an executive capacity on behalf of and in the name of each Hand, thereby assisting him in carrying out his work.

111.8 In June 1968 the Institution of the Continental Boards of Counselors was brought into being, fulfilling the goal of extending the aforementioned functions of the Hands into the future, and this momentous decision was accompanied by the next step in the development of the Institution of the Hands of the Cause: the continental Hands were to serve henceforth on a worldwide basis and operate individually in direct relationship to the Universal House of Justice; the Hands ceased to be responsible for the direction of the Auxiliary Boards, which became an auxiliary institution of the Continental Boards of Counselors; the Hands of the Cause residing in the Holy Land were given the task of acting as liaison between the Universal House of Justice and the Boards of Counselors; and the working interrelationships between the Hands and the Boards of Counselors were established. Reference was also made to the future establishment by the Universal House of Justice, with the assistance of the Hands residing in the Holy Land, of an international teaching center in the Holy Land.[2]

111.9 In July 1969 and at Riḍván 1970 further increases in the numbers of Counselors and Auxiliary Board members were made.

111.10 Other developments in the Institution of the Hands of the Cause and the Institution of the Continental Boards of Counselors will no doubt take place in future as the international teaching center comes into being and as the work of the Counselors expands.


Distinctions Between the Rulers and the Learned

111.11 We have noted that the Hands, the Counselors and the Auxiliary Boards are sometimes referred to by the friends as the "appointive arm" of the Administrative Order in contradistinction to the Universal House of Justice and the National and Local Assemblies which constitute the "elective arm." While there is truth in this description as it applies to the method used in the creation of these institutions, the friends should understand that it is not only the fact of appointment that particularly distinguishes the institutions of the Hands, Counselors and Auxiliary Boards. There are, for instance, many more believers appointed to committees in the "elective arm" than are serving in the so-called "appointive arm." A more striking distinction is that whereas the "rulers" in the Cause function as corporate bodies, the "learned" operate primarily as individuals.


Exclusion of Past Evils and Retention of Beneficial Elements

111.12 In a letter written on 14 March 1927 to the Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Istanbul, the Guardian's Secretary explained, on his behalf, the principle in the Cause of action by majority vote. He pointed out how, in the past, it was certain individuals who "accounted themselves as superior in knowledge and elevated in position" who caused division, and that it was those "who pretended to be the most distinguished of all" who "always proved themselves to be the source of contention." "But praise be to God," he continued, "that the Pen of Glory has done away with the unyielding and dictatorial views of the learned and the wise, dismissed the assertions of individuals as an authoritative criterion, even though they were recognized as the most accomplished and learned among men and ordained that all matters be referred to authorized centers and specified Assemblies. Even so, no Assembly has been invested with the absolute authority to deal with such general matters as affect the interests of nations. Nay rather, He has brought all the assemblies together under the shadow of one House of Justice, one divinely appointed Center, so that there would be only one Center and all the rest integrated into a single body, revolving around one expressly designated Pivot, thus making them all proof against schism and division." (Translated from the Persian.)

111.13 Having permanently excluded the evils admittedly inherent in the institutions of the "learned" in past dispensations, Bahá’u’lláh has nevertheless embodied in His Administrative Order the beneficent elements which exist in such institutions, elements which are of fundamental value for the progress of the Cause, as can be gauged from even a cursory reading of the Guardian's message of 4 June 1957.

111.14 The existence of institutions of such exalted rank, comprising individuals who play such a vital role, who yet have no legislative, administrative or judicial authority, and are entirely devoid of priestly functions or the right to make authoritative interpretations, is a feature of Bahá’í administration unparalleled in the religions of the past. The newness and uniqueness, of this concept make it difficult to grasp; only as the Bahá’í Community grows and the believers are increasingly able to contemplate its administrative structure uninfluenced by concepts from past ages, will the vital interdependence of the "rulers" and "learned" in the Faith be properly understood, and the inestimable value of their interaction be fully recognized.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Message to Bahá’í Unity Conference, Ganado, Arizona
18 May 1972

Bahá’í Unity Conference Ganado, Arizona

Beloved Friends,

112.1 Praise be to the Almighty that you have gathered in that beautiful spot in a spirit of love and harmony for the purpose of strengthening the bonds of unity between yourselves and among all men.

112.2 The All-Wise Creator of earth and heaven has from the beginning which has no beginning sent to His peoples Divine Messengers to guide them to the Straight Path. These Wise Ones have come to establish the unity of the Kingdom in human hearts. This great evolutionary process of building the organic unity of the human race has entered a new stage with this mighty message of Bahá’u’lláh. His voice is the voice of the Great Spirit. His love for humankind is the force of the New Age.

112.3 He who sends the rain, who causes the sun and the stars to shine, the rivers to flow, the winds to blow and the earth to give forth her bounties has in this Great Day sent to all mankind Bahá’u’lláh. It is this Great One who has opened the door of divine knowledge to every soul. It is His teachings that will establish world unity and bring about universal peace.

112.4 The people of the world are the tools in His hand. They must strive to understand His message and to walk in the path of His divine guidance. Every human being is responsible in this day to seek the truth for himself and thereafter to live according to that wise counsel. The old ones have all longed for this sweet message. Praise God that you have found it.

112.5 Now awakened to new wisdom, now guided to the straight path, now illumined with this mighty message, strive you day and night to guide and assist the thirsty ones in all lands to the ever-flowing fountain, the wandering ones to this fortress of certainty, the ignorant ones to this source of knowledge and the seekers to that One for whom their hearts long.

112.6 May your consultation reach so high a level of endeavor and purpose that the Great One will open before your faces the doors of the paradise of wisdom and love and cause the light of the Abhá Beauty to shine in your midst.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Establishment of Local Spiritual Assemblies during the Final Year of the Nine Year Plan
28 May 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

113.1 In order to stimulate the teaching work in every land and encourage the friends during this last year of the Nine Year Plan we have decided that as soon as the number of adult believers in any locality reaches or exceeds nine they are permitted to form their Local Spiritual Assembly immediately, rather than wait until 21 April 1973.

113.2 We hope moreover that, especially in the areas where the people are entering the Cause in troops, the implementation of this decision will increase the number of those communities which will, without the need for outside assistance, re-elect their Assemblies on the first day of Riḍván in 1973 and in succeeding years.

113.3 It is our prayer at the Sacred Threshold that during the months ahead the steadily mounting number of these divine institutions will tremendously reinforce the labors of the valiant servants of the Blessed Beauty in every clime.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on the National Spiritual Assembly
4 June 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

114.1 We have just made a compilation of extracts from letters written by Shoghi Effendi or by his secretaries on his behalf about the institution of the National Spiritual Assembly.[1] We have not attempted a complete compilation of all the available texts on the subject, but it is hoped that the enclosed material will be of assistance to members of National Spiritual Assemblies and the friends generally in their appreciation of this vital institution of the Faith.

114.2 We leave it to your discretion to determine in what manner you may wish to share the material with the friends under your jurisdiction.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Announcement of the Decision to Build the Seat of the Universal House of Justice
7 June 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

115.1 JOYFULLY INFORM BAHÁ’Í WORLD RANGE AND ACCELERATION GROWTH CAUSE BAHÁ’U’LLÁH LOCAL NATIONAL LEVELS AND RESULTANT EXPANSION ACTIVITIES WORLD CENTER IMPEL US NOW ANNOUNCE ERE COMPLETION NINE YEAR PLAN DECISION INITIATE PROCEDURE SELECT ARCHITECT DESIGN BUILDING FOR SEAT UNIVERSAL HOUSE JUSTICE ENVISAGED BELOVED GUARDIAN ON FAR FLUNG ARC HEART MOUNT CARMEL CENTRING SPOT CONSECRATED RESTING PLACES SISTER BROTHER MOTHER BELOVED MASTER.[1] CONSTRUCTION THIS CENTER LEGISLATION GOD'S WORLD-REDEEMING ORDER WILL CONSTITUTE FIRST MAJOR STEP DEVELOPMENT AREA SURROUNDING HOLY SHRINE SINCE COMPLETION INTERNATIONAL ARCHIVES BUILDING. MOVED PAY TRIBUTE EXPRESS HEARTFELT GRATITUDE OUTSTANDING SERVICES ROBERT MCLAUGHLIN IN PREPARATION FOR THIS HISTORIC UNDERTAKING. FERVENTLY PRAYING PROJECT NOW INITIATED MAY DURING YEARS IMMEDIATELY AHEAD PROGRESS UNINTERRUPTEDLY SPEEDILY ATTAIN MAJESTIC CONSUMMATION.[2]

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Plans for Commemorating the Centenary of the Revelation of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas
30 June 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

116.1 At Riḍván 1973 we shall, God willing, witness the successful conclusion of the nine-year-long, world-encircling enterprise which inaugurated the second epoch of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Divine Plan.[1] The victorious culmination of this initial stage of the tenth part of the majestic process set in motion over six thousand years ago will prepare the way for the next stage in the series of crusades destined to achieve the penetration of the Light of God's Faith into the remaining territories of the planet and the erection of the entire machinery of Bahá’u’lláh's Administrative Order throughout the world.[2]

116.2 On the Twelfth Day of Riḍván, the members of the National Spiritual Assemblies gathered in the Holy Land for the Third International Convention will participate in the commemoration of the One Hundredth Anniversary of the Revelation of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas.[3] To enable all believers throughout the world to share in the observance of this highly significant centenary, national and local celebrations for Bahá’ís only should be held on that day.

116.3 We call upon each community to undertake, during the period between the First Day of the Most Great Festival and the commemoration of the Declaration of the Blessed Báb,[4] a widespread proclamation campaign which would include publicity on the completion of the Nine Year Plan and the holding of the third International Convention at the Bahá’í World Center in the Holy Land.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Exhortation to Blot Out Every Last Trace of Prejudice
13 July 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

117.1 The blessings of the Ancient Beauty are being showered upon the followers of the Greatest Name. Our efforts to serve Him and humanity are being crowned with victories throughout the world. As we give thanks for these splendid achievements, as the Cause of God spreads in every land, as our institutions become more perfected, as the number of believers increases over the face of the planet, our individual lives must increasingly mirror forth each day the teachings of Bahá’u’lláh and we must so live our lives that all will see in us a different people. The acts we perform, the attitudes we manifest, the very words we speak should be an attraction, a magnet, drawing the sincere to the Divine Teachings.

117.2 Bahá’u’lláh tells us that prejudice in its various forms destroys the edifice of humanity. We are adjured by the Divine Messenger to eliminate all forms of prejudice from our lives. Our outer lives must show forth our beliefs. The world must see that, regardless of each passing whim or current fashion of the generality of mankind, the Bahá’í lives his life according to the tenets of his Faith. We must not allow the fear of rejection by our friends and neighbors to deter us from our goal: to live the Bahá’í life. Let us strive to blot out from our lives every last trace of prejudice―racial, religious, political, economic, national, tribal, class, cultural, and that which is based on differences of education or age. We shall be distinguished from our non-Bahá’í associates if our lives are adorned with this principle.

117.3 If we allow prejudice of any kind to manifest itself in us, we shall be guilty before God of causing a setback to the progress and real growth of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh. It is incumbent upon every believer to endeavor with a fierce determination to eliminate this defect from his thoughts and acts. It is the duty of the institutions of the Faith to inculcate this principle in the hearts of the friends through every means at their disposal including summer schools, conferences, institutes and study classes.

117.4 The fundamental purpose of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh is the realization of the organic unity of the entire human race. Bearing this glorious destiny in mind, and with entire reliance on the promises of the Blessed Beauty, we should follow His exhortation:

117.4a We love to see you at all times consorting in amity and concord within the paradise of My good-pleasure, and to inhale from your acts the fragrance of friendliness and unity, of loving-kindness and fellowship. . . .[1]
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Embryonic Nature of Local Spiritual Assemblies

30 July 1972

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Bolivia

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

118.1 In reply to your letter of 4 July asking guidance as to what is a functioning Local Spiritual Assembly, we offer you the following comments:

118.2 Local Spiritual Assemblies are at the present newly born institutions, struggling for the most part to establish themselves both in the Bahá’í community and in the world. They are as yet only embryos of the majestic institutions ordained by Bahá’u’lláh in His Writings. This is also true of National Spiritual Assemblies. In the following passage written by the Secretary of the Guardian on his behalf this point is elucidated:

118.2a The Bahá’í Administration is only the first shaping of what in future will come to be the social life and laws of community living. As yet the believers are only just beginning to grasp and practice it properly. So we must have patience if at times it seems a little self-conscious and rigid in its workings. It is because we are learning something very difficult but very wonderful―how to live together as a community of Bahá’ís, according to the glorious teachings.
(From letter dated 14 October 1941 to two believers)
118.3 What we find expounded in the writings of our Faith is the lofty station Local Spiritual Assemblies must attain in their gradual and at times painful development. In encouraging these Assemblies to attain this aim, there is no harm in the National Spiritual Assembly mentioning certain minimum requirements from time to time, provided it is clear that non-attainment of such standards, which by their very nature must be continuously revised with changing conditions, do not justify the withdrawal of recognition from any weak Assemblies. It would not be profitable therefore for the Universal House of Justice to lay down universal minimum standards for properly functioning Local Spiritual Assemblies, as these must necessarily differ from country to country, and even from district to district within the same country, in the process of the evolution of these Assemblies into Houses of Justice, as envisaged by Bahá’u’lláh.


Salient objectives of the Local Spiritual Assembly

118.4 Among the more salient objectives to be attained by the Local Spiritual Assembly in its process of development to full maturity are to act as a loving shepherd to the Bahá’í flock, promote unity and concord among the friends, direct the teaching work, protect the Cause of God, arrange for Feasts, anniversaries and regular meetings of the community, familiarize the Bahá’ís with its plans, invite the community to offer its recommendations, promote the welfare of youth and children, and participate, as circumstances permit, in humanitarian activities. In its relationship to the individual believer, the Assembly should continuously invite and encourage him to study the Faith, to deliver its glorious message, to live in accordance with its teachings, to contribute freely and regularly to the Fund, to participate in community activities, and to seek refuge in the Assembly for advice and help, when needed.

118.5 In its own meetings it must endeavor to develop skill in the difficult but highly rewarding art of Bahá’í consultation, a process which will require great self-discipline on the part of all members and complete reliance on the power of Bahá’u’lláh. It should hold regular meetings and ensure that all its members are currently informed of the activities of the Assembly, that its secretary carries out his duties, and its treasurer holds and disburses the funds of the Faith to its satisfaction, keeping proper accounts and issuing receipts for all contributions. Many Assemblies find that some of their activities such as teaching, observance of Feasts and anniversaries, solution of personal problems, and other duties are best dealt with by committees appointed by the Assembly and responsible to it.


The Bahá’í Quality of Leadership

118.6 In all cases submitted for its consideration the Assembly must uphold the standard of justice in delivering its verdict, and in all its dealings with the community and the outside world it must strive to evince the qualities of leadership. The following quotation from a letter of the Guardian summarizes in simple terms the immediate goal every Assembly should set for itself in its efforts to pursue the exalted standard of perfection inculcated in our writings:

118.6a The first quality for leadership, both among individuals and Assemblies is the capacity to use the energy and competence that exists in the rank and file of its followers. Otherwise the more competent members of the group will go at a tangent and try to find elsewhere a field of work where they could use their energy.
118.6b Shoghi Effendi hopes that the Assemblies will do their utmost in planning such teaching activities and that every single soul will be kept busy.
(From letter dated 30 August 1930 written on behalf of the Guardian to the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States and Canada)
118.7 In the compilation of texts we sent to all National Spiritual Assemblies in August 1970, and in the By-Laws of a Local Spiritual Assembly, you will find all the objectives Local Spiritual Assemblies must aim at achieving in their process of growth and development.[1] We recommend that you restudy these documents carefully and discuss this highly important problem with the Counselors of your zone, who will be only too glad to help you encourage the development of Local Spiritual Assemblies in your country.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Passing of Ishráq-Khávarí, Preeminent Bahá’í Scholar
6 August 1972

To the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Iran

119.1 GRIEVED LOSS PRE-EMINENT SCHOLAR VALUED PROMOTER FAITH ISHRÁQ-KHÁVARÍ.[1] HIS PRECIOUS INDEFATIGABLE SERVICES OVER SEVERAL DECADES WON HIM APPRECIATION BELOVED GUARDIAN. HIS SCHOLARLY CONTRIBUTIONS IMMORTALIZED THROUGH NUMEROUS USEFUL COMPILATIONS TREATISES BEARING ELOQUENT TRIBUTE HIS DEVOTION DEDICATION CAUSE GOD. URGE HOLD APPROPRIATE MEMORIAL GATHERINGS ASSURE RELATIVES FRIENDS FERVENT PRAYERS HOLY SHRINES.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Newsletters
24 August 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

120.1 It is clear from the writings of our beloved Guardian that the initiation, regular publication and distribution of a Bahá’í newsletter by each National Spiritual Assembly is one of its vital functions and a means of promoting understanding and unity among the friends, of stimulating their interest and deepening their knowledge of the teachings, and of co-ordinating the activities of the Faith.

120.2 In order to assist National Spiritual Assemblies to properly assess the importance of this activity and take effective steps to ensure that such a newsletter is issued and widely distributed among the friends, we attach a compilation of extracts on this subject from the letters written by the Guardian or on his behalf.[1] We urge you to study these extracts carefully and consider, as called for, ways and means of improving the standard, ensuring the regular release and facilitating the circulation of your news bulletin. We realize, of course, that in some countries it is necessary to issue the bulletin in more than one language.

120.3 A section of the attached extracts also deals with local newsletters. In some countries it may be feasible and desirable to encourage the issue of such bulletins by responsible Local Spiritual Assemblies.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Martyrdom of Three Iranian Bahá’í Students in the Philippine Islands
19 September 1972

To the Bahá’ís of the World

121.1 With feelings of deep sorrow we relate to the Bahá’í world the distressing circumstances surrounding the murder of three Iranian Bahá’í students, pioneers to the Philippine Islands.

121.2 Parviz Sadiqi, Faramarz Vujdani and Parviz Furughi were among a number of Iranian Bahá’í youth who answered the call for pioneers. With eleven others they registered at the Universities in Mindanao with the intention of completing their studies and proclaiming the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh. These three had conceived the plan of making teaching trips to a rural area inhabited by Muslims. When on 31 July the authorities of Mindanao State University were notified that they had left the campus the previous day and had not yet returned, search parties were immediately formed and the assistance of the police and local authorities obtained. After inquiries and search, led entirely by President Tamano of Mindanao State University, the bodies of the three young men were found in a shallow grave. They had been shot, grievously mutilated and two had been decapitated. The bodies were removed and given Bahá’í burial in a beautiful plot donated for the purpose.

121.3 Immediately upon receipt of the tragic news, Vicente Samaniego, Counsellor in Northeast Asia, in close cooperation with the National Spiritual Assembly of the Philippines, acted vigorously on behalf of the Bahá’ís and was given the utmost cooperation and sympathy by the authorities, police, military and civil. A convocation was called, attended by more than 900 students, faculty members and University officials. Prayers were said in English, Arabic and Persian. The President of the University gave a talk in which he said that the murdered Iranian students are not ordinary students, for with them is the Message of Bahá’u’lláh which is the way to unity. The Council of the Student Body asked that their new Social Hall be renamed Iranian Student Memorial Hall. Three thousand people marched in the funeral procession and six hundred went to the burial site to attend the interment.

121.4 A dignified burial was conducted by the Bahá’ís in the presence of University authorities and friends.

121.5 The relatives and friends of these three young men, who gave their lives in the service of the Blessed Beauty, are assured of the loving sympathy and prayers of their fellow believers. The sacrifice made by these youth adds a crown of glory to the wonderful services now being performed by Bahá’í youth throughout the world. Bahá’u’lláh Himself testifies:

121.5a They that have forsaken their country in the path of God and subsequently ascended unto His presence, such souls shall be blessed by the Concourse on High and their names recorded by the Pen of Glory among such as have laid down their lives as martyrs in the path of God, the Help in peril, the Self-Subsistent.[1]
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Bahá’í life
24 November 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

122.1 We are asking the National Spiritual Assembly of the United Kingdom to send you by surface mail one copy of their compilation The Pattern of Bahá’í Life, and attached we are sending you an addendum consisting of quotations from the letters and writings of the beloved Guardian.[1]

122.2 These extracts are shared with you with the thought that you may be able to use them in assisting the believers to attain a fuller understanding of what it means to be a Bahá’í and to guide and aid them to pattern their personal lives in accordance with the Teachings.

122.3 You are free to use this material in whatever way is appropriate and best suited to the needs of your community. For example, you may wish to purchase copies of The Pattern of Bahá’í Life and use them with printed or mimeographed copies of the attached compilation, or you may prefer to issue a compilation of your own. The important thing is that the moral and spiritual admonitions contained in our writings be widely disseminated, properly understood, and the friends encouraged to follow them. Shoghi Effendi has pointed out:

122.3a Humanity, through suffering and turmoil, is swiftly moving on towards its destiny; if we be loiterers, if we fail to play our part surely others will be called upon to take up our task as ministers to the crying needs of this afflicted world.
122.3b Not by the force of our numbers, not by the mere exposition of a set of new and noble principles, not by an organized campaign of reaching―no matter how worldwide and elaborate in its character―not even by the staunchness of our faith or the exaltation of our enthusiasm, can we ultimately hope to vindicate in the eyes of a critical and sceptical age the supreme claim of the Abhá Revelation. One thing and only one thing will unfailingly and alone secure the undoubted triumph of this sacred Cause, namely the extent to which our own inner life and private character mirror forth in their manifold aspects the splendor of those eternal principles proclaimed by Bahá’u’lláh.[2]
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Adoption of the Constitution of the Universal House of Justice
26 November 1972

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

123.1 The following cable has just been sent to the United States Bahá’í News for publication.

123.2 WITH GRATEFUL JOYOUS HEARTS ANNOUNCE ENTIRE BAHÁ’Í WORLD ADOPTION PROFOUNDLY SIGNIFICANT STEP IN UNFOLDMENT MISSION SUPREME ORGAN BAHÁ’Í WORLD COMMONWEALTH THROUGH FORMULATION CONSTITUTION UNIVERSAL HOUSE JUSTICE. AFTER OFFERING HUMBLE PRAYERS GRATITUDE ON DAY COVENANT AT THREE SACRED THRESHOLDS BAHJI HAIFA MEMBERS GATHERED COUNCIL CHAMBER PRECINCTS HOUSE BLESSED MASTER APPENDED THEIR SIGNATURES FIXED SEAL ON INSTRUMENT ENVISAGED WRITINGS BELOVED GUARDIAN HAILED BY HIM AS MOST GREAT LAW FAITH BAHÁ’U’LLÁH.[1] FULLY ASSURED MEASURE JUST TAKEN WILL FURTHER REINFORCE TIES BINDING WORLD CENTER TO NATIONAL LOCAL COMMUNITIES THROUGHOUT WORLD RELEASE FRESH ENERGIES INCREASE ENTHUSIASM CONFIDENCE VALIANT WORKERS HIS DIVINE VINEYARD LABOURING ASSIDUOUSLY BRING MANKIND UNDER SHELTER HIS ALL-GLORIOUS COVENANT.

123.3 Please share this joyous news with the friends. It is anticipated that the Constitution will be published at Riḍván.[2]

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Activities for the Year Preceding the Global Plan to be Launched Riḍván 1974
14 January 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

124.1 As the Bahá’í world approaches the triumphant conclusion of the Nine Year Plan it gives us the utmost gratification to see that a few National Spiritual Assemblies have already formulated plans for activity during the coming Bahá’í year.

124.2 The next global plan will be launched at Riḍván 1974 and you will therefore have twelve months to prepare for it. We call upon you all to take the greatest possible advantage of that year to:

124.2a Strengthen the foundations of your achievements through developing and enriching Bahá’í community life, fostering youth activity and through all means suited to your circumstances; and
124.2b Continue expansion of the Faith, trying new openings and possibilities not fully explored when you were under the pressure of other priorities.
124.3 Obviously conditions differ in the various areas under the jurisdiction of the National Spiritual Assemblies, and the goals which each Assembly adopts must be suited to its particular circumstances and possibilities, but, as the beloved Guardian once pointed out, "The broader the basis" of such a campaign, and "the deeper its roots, the finer the flower into which it shall eventually blossom."[1]

124.4 We ask you to make your plans now and to send us your report of them to reach us as soon as possible and not later than 1 April 1973 so that we may present a consolidated summary to the International Convention. We feel that such a summary will be an inspiration and a source of new ideas to the delegates when they are consulting upon the challenges that lie before the Bahá’í community in the years ahead and which must be faced during the next global plan. Moreover, the achievements of the coming year, added to the great victories of the Nine Year Plan, will enable the worldwide Bahá’í community to enter with even greater assurance upon the next stage of its ever-unfolding destiny.

124.5 We pray at the Holy Shrines that the blessings of Bahá’u’lláh may guide and assist you with a fresh measure of His divine grace in the few months separating us from the glorious festivities of next Riḍván.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
Universal House of Justice



/*chapter*/Announcement of the Completion of the Synopsis and Codification of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas
19 January 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

125.1 JOYFULLY ANNOUNCE COMPLETION SYNOPSIS CODIFICATION KITAB-I-AQDAS FOR PUBLICATION RIḌVÁN SYNCHRONIZING CELEBRATION HUNDREDTH ANNIVERSARY REVELATION MOST HOLY BOOK FULFILLING WORLD CENTER GOAL NINE YEAR PLAN.[1] CONFIDENT RELEASE THIS PUBLICATION ENVISAGED BY BELOVED GUARDIAN AND WHOSE MAIN FEATURES HE OUTLINED WILL CONSTITUTE ANOTHER SIGNIFICANT STEP PATH LEADING BAHÁ’Í COMMUNITY FULL MATURITY ESTABLISHMENT WORLD ORDER BAHÁ’U’LLÁH.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Obeying the Law of God in One's Personal Life
6 February 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

126.1 The following is an excerpt from a letter written recently in response to questions from an individual believer. As it is of general interest we are sending it to you so that you may share it with the friends within your jurisdiction in whatever manner you judge wise and necessary.

126.2 Just as there are laws governing our physical lives, requiring that we must supply our bodies with certain foods, maintain them within a certain range of temperatures, and so forth, if we wish to avoid physical disabilities, so also there are laws governing our spiritual lives. These laws are revealed to mankind in each age by the Manifestation of God, and obedience to them is of vital importance if each human being, and mankind in general, is to develop properly and harmoniously. Moreover, these various aspects are interdependent. If an individual violates the spiritual laws for his own development he will cause injury not only to himself but to the society in which he lives. Similarly, the condition of society has a direct effect on the individuals who must live within it.

126.3 As you point out, it is particularly difficult to follow the laws of Bahá’u’lláh in present-day society whose accepted practice is so at variance with the standards of the Faith. However, there are certain laws that are so fundamental to the healthy functioning of human society that they must be upheld whatever the circumstances. Realizing the degree of human frailty, Bahá’u’lláh has provided that other laws are to be applied only gradually, but these too, once they are applied, must be followed, or else society will not be reformed but will sink into an ever worsening condition. It is the challenging task of the Bahá’ís to obey the law of God in their own lives, and gradually to win the rest of mankind to its acceptance.


The Effect of Obedience to the Laws of Bahá’u’lláh on One's Life

126.4 In considering the effect of obedience to the laws on individual lives, one must remember that the purpose of this life is to prepare the soul for the next. Here one must learn to control and direct one's animal impulses, not to be a slave to them. Life in this world is a succession of tests and achievements, of falling short and of making new spiritual advances. Sometimes the course may seem very hard, but one can witness, again and again, that the soul who steadfastly obeys the law of Bahá’u’lláh, however hard it may seem, grows spiritually, while the one who compromises with the law for the sake of his own apparent happiness is seen to have been following a chimera: he does not attain the happiness he sought, he retards his spiritual advance and often brings new problems upon himself.

126.5 To give one very obvious example: the Bahá’í law requiring consent of parents to marriage. All too often nowadays such consent is withheld by non-Bahá’í parents for reasons of bigotry or racial prejudice; yet we have seen again and again the profound effect on those very parents of the firmness of the children in the Bahá’í law, to the extent that not only is the consent ultimately given in many cases, but the character of the parents can be affected and their relationship with their child greatly strengthened.

126.6 Thus, by upholding Bahá’í law in the face of all difficulties we not only strengthen our own characters but influence those around us.


The Bahá’í Teachings on Sexual Intercourse

126.7 The Bahá’í teaching on sexual intercourse is very clear. It is permissible only between a man and the woman who is his wife. In this connection we share with you extracts from four letters written on behalf of the Guardian which throw light on various aspects of the matter. One of them contains the paragraph that you quote in your letter.

126.7a With reference to the question you have asked concerning the Bahá’í attitude towards the problem of sex and its relation to marriage: The Bahá’í Teachings on this matter, which is of such vital concern and about which there is such a wide divergency of views, are very clear and emphatic. Briefly stated the Bahá’í conception of sex is based on the belief that chastity should be strictly practised by both sexes, not only because it is in itself highly commendable ethically, but also due to its being the only way to a happy and successful marital life. Sex relationships of any form, outside marriage, are not permissible therefore, and whoso violates this rule will not only be responsible to God, but will incur the necessary punishment from society. The Bahá’í Faith recognizes the value of the sex impulse, but condemns its illegitimate and improper expression such as free love, companionate marriage and others, all of which it considers positively harmful to man and to the society in which he lives. The proper use of the sex instinct is the natural right of every individual, and it is precisely for this very purpose that the institution of marriage has been established. The Bahá’ís do not believe in the suppression of the sex impulse but in its regulation and control.
(From a letter dated 5 September 1938, to an individual believer)
126.7b The question you raise as to the place in one's life that a deep bond of love with someone we meet other than our husband or wife can have is easily defined in view of the teachings. Chastity implies both before and after marriage an unsullied, chaste sex life. Before marriage absolutely chaste, after marriage absolutely faithful to one's chosen companion. Faithful in all sexual acts, faithful in word and in deed. The world today is submerged, amongst other things, in an over-exaggeration of the importance of physical love, and a dearth of spiritual values. In as far as possible the believers should try to realize this and rise above the level of their fellowmen who are, typical of all decadent periods in history, placing so much overemphasis on the purely physical side of mating. Outside of their normal, legitimate married life they should seek to establish bonds of comradeship and love which are eternal and founded on the spiritual life of man, not on his physical life. This is one of the many fields in which it is incumbent on the Bahá’ís to set the example and lead the way to a true human standard of life, when the soul of man is exalted and his body but the tool for his enlightened spirit. Needless to say this does not preclude the living of a perfectly normal sex life in its legitimate channel of marriage.
(From a letter dated 28 September 1941, to an individual believer)
126.7c Concerning your question whether there are any legitimate forms of expression of the sex instinct outside of marriage: according to the Bahá’í Teachings no sexual act can be considered lawful unless performed between lawfully married persons. Outside of marital life there can be no lawful or healthy use of the sex impulse. The Bahá’í youth should, on the one hand, be taught the lesson of self-control which, when exercised, undoubtedly has a salutary effect on the development, of character and of personality in general, and on the other should be advised, nay even encouraged, to contract marriage while still young and in full possession of their physical vigor. Economic factors, no doubt, are often a serious hindrance to early marriage, but in most cases are only an excuse, and as such should not be overstressed.
(From a letter dated 13 December 1940, to an individual believer)
126.7d As regards your question whether it would be advisable and useful for you to marry again: he feels unable to give you any definite answer on that point, as this is essentially a private affair about which you, and the friends around you or your Local Assembly, are in a much better position to judge. Of course, under normal circumstances, every person should consider it his moral duty to marry. And this is what Bahá’u’lláh has encouraged the believers to do. But marriage is by no means an obligation. In the last resort it is for the individual to decide whether he wishes to lead a family life or live in a state of celibacy.
(From a letter dated 3 May 1936, to an individual believer)
126.8 You express surprise at the Guardian's reference to "the necessary punishment from society." In the Kitáb-i-Aqdas Bahá’u’lláh prohibits sexual immorality and in the Annex to that Book states that the various degrees of sexual offences and the punishments for them are to be decided by the Universal House of Justice. In this connection it should be realized that there is a distinction drawn in the Faith between the attitudes which should characterize individuals in their relationship to other people, namely, loving forgiveness, forbearance, and concern with one's own sins, not the sins of others, and those attitudes which should be shown by the Spiritual Assemblies, whose duty is to administer the law of God with justice.

126.9 A number of sexual problems, such as homosexuality and trans-sexuality can well have medical aspects, and in such cases recourse should certainly be had to the best medical assistance. But it is clear from the teaching of Bahá’u’lláh that homosexuality is not a condition to which a person should be reconciled, but is a distortion of his or her nature which should be controlled and overcome. This may require a hard struggle, but so also can be the struggle of a heterosexual person to control his or her desires. The exercise of self-control in this, as in so very many other aspects of life, has a beneficial effect on the progress of the soul. It should, moreover, be borne in mind that although to be married is highly desirable, and Bahá’u’lláh has strongly recommended it, it is not the central purpose of life. If a person has to wait a considerable period before finding a spouse, or if ultimately, he or she must remain single, it does not mean that he or she is thereby unable to fulfil his or her life's purpose.


One's Attitude Toward the Laws of Bahá’u’lláh

126.10 In all this we have been speaking about the attitude that Bahá’ís should have towards the law of Bahá’u’lláh. You, however, as a doctor working mainly as a counsellor in family and sexual problems, will mostly be concerned with advising non-Bahá’ís, who do not accept, and see no reason to follow, the laws of Bahá’u’lláh. You are already a qualified practitioner in your field, and no doubt you give advice on the basis of what you have learned from study and experience―a whole fabric of concepts about the human mind, its growth, development and proper functioning, which you have learned and evolved, without reference to the teachings of Bahá’u’lláh. Now, as a Bahá’í, you know that what Bahá’u’lláh teaches about the purpose of human life, the nature of the human being and the proper conduct of human lives, is divinely revealed and therefore true. However, it will inevitably take time for you not only to study the Bahá’í teachings so that you clearly understand them, but also to work out how they modify your professional concepts. This is, of course, not an unusual predicament for a scientist. How often in the course of research is a factor discovered which requires a revolution in thinking over a wide field of human endeavor. You must be guided in each case by your own professional knowledge and judgement as illuminated by your growing knowledge of the Bahá’í teachings; undoubtedly you will find that your own understanding of the human problems dealt with in your work will change and develop and you will see new and improved ways of helping the people who come to you.

126.11 Psychology is still a very young and inexact science, and as the years go by Bahá’í psychologists, who know from the teachings of Bahá’u’lláh the true pattern of human life, will be able to make great strides in the development of this science, and will help profoundly in the alleviation of human suffering.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Purchase of Mazra‘ih Mansion
15 March 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

127.10 OCCASION NAW-RUZ 130[1] JOYOUSLY ANNOUNCE BAHÁ’Í WORLD ACQUISITION BY PURCHASE MANSION MAZRA'IH RESULT SEVERAL YEARS PATIENT PERSISTENT DETERMINED NEGOTIATIONS THEREBY ADDING TO BAHÁ’Í ENDOWMENTS HOLY LAND FIRST RESIDENCE BAHÁ’U’LLÁH AFTER NINE YEARS SPENT WALLED PRISON CITY 'AKKA. CONTROL THIS HOLY SITE REACQUIRED BY BELOVED GUARDIAN AFTER LAPSE MORE THAN FIFTY YEARS WHEN HE SECURED LEASE MANSION 1950 EXTENDED TO PRESENT TIME. PURCHASE INCLUDES LAND AREA APPROXIMATING TWENTY-FOUR THOUSAND SQUARE METRES HIGHLY SUITABLE EXTENSION GARDENS CULTIVATION. OFFERING PRAYER THANKSGIVING SACRED THRESHOLD THIS GREATLY CHERISHED BOUNTY.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Election of the Universal House of Justice―Riḍván 1973
3 May 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

129.1 NEWLY ELECTED MEMBERS UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE ‘ALÍ NAKHJAVÁNÍ HUSHMAND FATHEAZAM AMOZ GIBSON IAN SEMPLE DAVID HOFMAN CHARLES WOLCOTT BORRAH KAVELIN DAVID RUHE HUGH CHANCE.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



1973-1974 - A Year of Preparation
/*chapter*/Announcement of the Acceptance of the Faith by His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II of Western Samoa
7 May 1973

To the Bahá’ís of the World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

130.1 It is now possible to share with you all the news of an event which crowns the victories with which Bahá’u’lláh has blessed His followers during the Nine Year Plan, an event of which the true significance will be fully understood only in the course of centuries to come: a reigning monarch has accepted the Message of Bahá’u’lláh.

130.2 Among those to whom The Proclamation of Bahá’u’lláh was presented in 1967 was His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II, the Head of State of the independent nation of Western Samoa in the heart of the Pacific Ocean.[1] His Highness, who had already heard of the Faith, showed immediately that the sacred Words had touched his heart, and the Universal House of Justice thereupon asked the Hand of the Cause Dr Ugo Giachery, who had presented the book to him, to return to Western Samoa for further audiences with His Highness. Following this visit the Malietoa conveyed his acceptance of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh to the Universal House of Justice and became the first reigning sovereign to enter beneath the shade of this Cause.

130.3 His Highness decided, with the full agreement of the Universal House of Justice, that it was not propitious to make his declaration public at that time. He has been visited from time to time by Hands of the Cause and other believers, and continual touch with His Highness has been maintained by the House of Justice through Mr Suhayl ‘Alá’í, a member of the Continental Board of Counselors for Australasia. Gradually the Malietoa has let it be known to those around him that he has accepted Bahá’u’lláh. Now he has judged the time ripe to share this wondrous news with his fellow-believers in all parts of the world, by addressing to the International Bahá’í Convention the gracious and inspiring message of which a copy is enclosed with this letter. . . .[2]

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Establishment of the International Teaching Center
5 June 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

131.1 ANNOUNCE ESTABLISHMENT HOLY LAND LONG ANTICIPATED INTERNATIONAL TEACHING CENTER DESTINED EVOLVE INTO ONE THOSE WORLD-SHAKING WORLD-EMBRACING WORLD-DIRECTING ADMINISTRATIVE INSTITUTIONS ORDAINED BY BAHÁ’U’LLÁH ANTICIPATED BY ‘ABDU’L-BAHÁ ELUCIDATED BY SHOGHI EFFENDI. MEMBERSHIP THIS NASCENT INSTITUTION COMPRISES ALL HANDS CAUSE GOD AND INITIALLY THREE COUNSELORS WHO WITH HANDS PRESENT HOLY LAND WILL CONSTITUTE NUCLEUS ITS VITAL OPERATIONS. CALLING UPON HOOPER DUNBAR FLORENCE MAYBERRY 'AZIZ YAZDI PROCEED HOLY LAND ASSUME THIS HIGHLY MERITORIOUS SERVICE. OFFERING PRAYERS HEARTFELT GRATITUDE SACRED THRESHOLD THIS FURTHER EVIDENCE ORGANIC EVOLUTION ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER BAHÁ’U’LLÁH.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Elucidation of the Duties of the International Teaching Center and Expansion of the Continental Boards of Counselors
8 June 1973

To the Bahá’ís of the World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

132.1 The centennial year of the revelation of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas has already witnessed events of such capital significance in the annals of the Bahá’í Dispensation as to cause us to contemplate with awe the rapidity with which Divine Providence is advancing the Cause of the Most Great Name. The time is indeed propitious for the establishment of the International Teaching Center, a development which, at one and the same time, brings to fruition the work of the Hands of the Cause residing in the Holy Land and provides for its extension into the future, links the institution of the Boards of Counselors even more intimately with that of the Hands of the Cause of God, and powerfully reinforces the discharge of the rapidly growing responsibilities of the Universal House of Justice.

132.2 This International Teaching Center now established will, in due course, operate from that building designated by the Guardian as the seat for the Hands of the Cause, which must be raised on the Arc on Mount Carmel in close proximity to the Seat of the Universal House of Justice.[1]

132.3 The duties now assigned to this nascent institution are:

132.3a - To coordinate, stimulate and direct the activities of the Continental Boards of Counselors and to act as liaison between them and the Universal House of Justice.
132.3b - To be fully informed of the situation of the Cause in all parts of the world and to be able, from the background of this knowledge, to make reports and recommendations to the Universal House of Justice and give advice to the Continental Boards of Counselors.
132.3c - To be alert to possibilities, both within and without the Bahá’í community, for the extension of the teaching work into receptive or needy areas, and to draw the attention of the Universal House of Justice and the Continental Boards of Counselors to such possibilities, making recommendations for action.
132.3d - To determine and anticipate needs for literature, pioneers and travelling teachers and to work out teaching plans, both regional and global, for the approval of the Universal House of Justice.
132.4 All the Hands of the Cause of God will be members of the International Teaching Center. Each Hand will be kept regularly informed of the activities of the Center through reports or copies of its minutes, and will be able, wherever he may be residing or travelling, to convey suggestions, recommendations and information to the Center and, whenever he is in the Holy Land, to take part in the consultations and other activities of the Center.

132.5 In addition, we now appoint Mr Hooper Dunbar, Mrs Florence Mayberry and Mr ‘Azíz Yazdí to membership of the International Teaching Center, with the rank of Counsellor. These believers, who have been serving with distinction on the Continental Boards of Counselors in South America, North America and Central and East Africa respectively, will henceforth reside in Haifa and will, together with the Hands present in the Holy Land, constitute the nucleus of the operations of the Center.

132.6 Authority for the expulsion and reinstatement of Covenant-breakers remains with the Hands of the Cause of God. All such matters will be investigated locally by the relative Continental Board of Counselors in consultation with any Hand or Hands who may be in the area. The Continental Board of Counselors and the Hands concerned will then make their reports to the International Teaching Center where they will be considered. The decision whether or not to expel or reinstate will be made by the Hands of the Cause residing in the Holy Land who will, as at present, submit their decision to the Universal House of Justice for approval.

132.7 The following changes to the zones of the Continental Boards of Counselors are now made:

132.7a - The number of zones has been raised to twelve by the removal of India, Tibet, Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and the Laccadive, Maldive, Andaman and Nicobar Islands from Central Asia.
132.7b - The Philippines, Hong Kong and Macau are transferred from Northeastern Asia to Southeastern Asia.
132.7c - The Caroline Islands and all other Pacific islands lying north of the equator and between longitudes 140o east and 140o west, with the exception of the Gilbert Islands, will be transferred from the zone of Australasia to the zone of Northeastern Asia. Islands under the jurisdiction of the National Spiritual Assembly of Alaska remain in the zone of North America.
132.8 The number of Counselors is now raised to fifty-seven by the appointment of Mr Friday Ekpe and Mr Zekrullah Kazemi in Northwestern Africa, Mr Hushang Ahdieh and Mr Peter Vuyiya in Central and East Africa, Dr Sarah Pereira and Mrs Velma Sherrill in North America, Mr Rowland Estall and Mr Paul Lucas in Central America, Mrs Leonora Armstrong, Mr Peter McLaren and Mr Raul Pavon in South America, Mr Dipchand Khianra and Mrs Zena Sorabjee in South Central Asia, Mr Firaydun Mithaqiyan in Southeastern Asia, Mr Richard Benson and Miss Elena Marsella in Northeastern Asia and Miss Violet Hoehnke in Australasia. Dr William Maxwell who has been rendering distinguished service as a member of the Continental Board of Counselors in Northwestern Africa has been obliged to return to the United States.

132.9 Mrs Zena Sorabjee is appointed Trustee of the new Continental Fund of South Central Asia, while Mr Hushang Ahdieh and Mr Mas‘úd Khamsí are appointed the new Trustees of the Continental Funds of Central and East Africa and South America respectively.

132.10 Beyond these significant developments at the World Center of the Faith and on the continental level, it is becoming increasingly necessary in many parts of the world for the Auxiliary Boards to be reinforced. The nature of the work differs from zone to zone and the Universal House of Justice is now consulting the Boards of Counselors on this matter before making an announcement.

132.11 The decisions now announced are the outcome of deliberation extending over a number of years, reinforced by consultations with the Hands of the Cause of God, and especially with the Hands residing in the Holy Land who were requested in 1968 to assist the Universal House of Justice in the establishment of the International Teaching Center, a task that now increases in magnitude as that Center begins its work.

132.12 It is our fervent prayer that the Blessed Beauty will abundantly confirm this latest unfoldment of His divinely-purposed Administrative Order.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



Zones of the Continental Boards of Counselors

As Revised by the Universal House of Justice in May 1973

132.13 1. Northwestern Africa All the continent of Africa west of the eastern frontiers of Tunisia, Algeria, Niger and Nigeria plus the Cape Verde Islands.

132.14 2. Central and East Africa All the continent of Africa east of the western frontiers of Libya, Chad and the United Cameroon Republic and north of the southern frontiers of Zaire and Tanzania plus the islands of Fernando Po, Principe, Sao Tome and Annobon in the Atlantic Ocean and Zanzibar, Pemba and Mafia Islands in the Indian Ocean.

132.15 3. Southern Africa All the continent of Africa south of the northern frontiers of Angola, Zambia, Malawi and Mozambique plus the Island of Madagascar and all islands in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans between longitudes 20° west and 80° east and south of the equator with the exception of the Islands of Annobon, Zanzibar, Pemba, and Mafia which are assigned to the zone of Central and East Africa.

132.16 4. North America All the continent of America north of the southern frontier of the United States plus all offshore islands in the Pacific and Arctic Oceans including the Aleutian chain and all islands under the jurisdiction of the National Spiritual Assembly of Alaska, also Greenland and all offshore islands politically belonging to Greenland, all islands in the Atlantic Ocean west of longitude 40o west and between latitude 60o north and the Tropic of Cancer plus those Bahama Islands lying south of the Tropic of Cancer.

132.17 5. Central America All the continent of America south of the northern frontier of Mexico and north of the southern frontier of Panama plus the offshore islands in the Pacific Ocean belonging politically to countries of this zone plus Clipperton Island, all islands in the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea south of the Tropic of Cancer except the Bahama Islands which are allocated to the zone of North America and islands belonging politically to Colombia and Venezuela, the islands of Curacao, Bonaire, Aruba, Trinidad and Tobago which are all allocated to the zone of South America.

132.1a 6. South America All the continent of South America, the Galapagos Islands, Curacao, Bonaire, Aruba, Trinidad and Tobago, all islands in the Caribbean and North Atlantic Oceans belonging politically to countries of this zone plus all islands in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans south of the equator and between longitude 120° west and longitude 20° west.
132.19 7. Western Asia All the continent of Asia west of the eastern boundaries of Pakistan, Sinkiang, the Mongolian Republic, the Oblasts of Chita and Irkutsk and the Kray of Krasnoyarsk and east of the western boundaries of Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, plus those parts of Turkey and Kazakhstan which lie in Europe and including the Transcaucasian S.S.R.s of Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan, as well as all islands in the Persian Gulf and islands in the Arabian Sea belonging politically to countries of this zone.

132.20 8. South Central Asia India, Tibet, Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and the Laccadive, Maldive, Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

132.21 9. Southeastern Asia China south of the northern boundaries of Yuennan, Szechwan, Hupeh, Anhwei and Kiangsu, as well as Burma, Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, Cambodia, Malaysia, Brunei, Indonesia, the Philippines, Hong Kong and Macau. Excluding Portuguese Timor.

132.22 10. Northeastern Asia All the Soviet Union cast of the western boundary of the Yakutsk A.S.S.R. and the Oblast of Amur, China east of Sinkiang and north of the southern boundaries of Tsinghai, Kansu, Shensi, Honan and Shantung; Korea, Japan, Taiwan and all islands belonging politically to those nations plus all islands in the Pacific Ocean north of the equator and between the longitudes of 140o east and 140o west with the exception of the Gilbert Islands and those islands under the jurisdiction of the National Spiritual Assembly of Alaska, but including those Caroline Islands lying west of longitude 140o east.

132.23 11. Australasia Australia and New Zealand plus all islands in the Indian and Pacific Oceans lying south of the equator and between the longitudes of 80o east and 120o west including Portuguese Timor and the Gilbert and Ellice Islands but excepting Indonesia.

132.24 12. Europe The entire continent of Europe less those portions of Kazakhstan and Turkey which lie in Europe, plus Iceland and all islands in the Atlantic Ocean north of latitude 60 degrees north which belong politically to nations of the European continent plus all islands in the Atlantic Ocean east of longitude 40 degrees west and between latitude 60 degrees north and the Tropic of Cancer plus all islands of the Mediterranean Sea including Cyprus but excluding islands belonging politically to nations of the African and Asiatic continents.

132.25 Membership of the Continental Boards of Counselors, According to the New Boundaries of May 1973

(New appointments are indicated with an asterisk.)

Northwestern Africa
Ḥusayn Ardikání (Trustee of Continental Fund)
Friday Ekpe*
Zekrullah Kazemi*
Muḥammad Kebdani

Central and East Africa
Hushang Ahdieh (Trustee of Continental Fund)
Oloro Epyeru
Kolonario Oule
Isobel Sabri
Mihdí Samandarí
Peter Vuyiya

Southern Africa
Seewoosumbur-Jeehoba Appa
Shidan Fat’he-Aazam (Trustee of Continental Fund)
Bahiyyih Winckler

North America
Lloyd Gardner
Sarah Pereira*
Velma Sherrill*
Edna True (Trustee of Continental Fund)

Central America
Carmen de Burafato,
Rowland Estall*
Artemus Lamb
Paul Lucas*
Alfred Osborne (Trustee of Continental Fund)

South America
Leonora Armstrong*
Athos Costas
Mas‘úd Khamsí (Trustee of Continental Fund)
Peter McLaren*
Raul Pavon*
Donald Witzel

Western Asia
Iraj Ayman
Masíḥ Farhangí
Hadi Rahmami (Trustee of Continental Fund)
Manúchihr Salmánpúr

South Central Asia
Shirin Boman
Dipchand Khianra*
Zena Sorabjee* (Trustee of Continental Fund)
Sankaran-Nair Vasudevan

Southeastern Asia
Firaydun Mithaqiyan*
Khudáraḥm Paymán (Trustee of Continental Fund)
Vicente Samaniego
Chellie Sundram
Yan Kee Leong

Northeastern Asia
Richard Benson*
John McHenry III
Elena Marsella*
Rúḥu’lláh Mumtází (Trustee of Continental Fund)

Australasia
Suhayl ‘Alá’í
Violet Hoehnke*
Howard Harwood
Thelma Perks (Trustee of Continental Fund)

Europe
Erik Blumenthal
Anneliese Bopp
Dorothy Ferraby
Louis Hénuzet (Trustee of Continental Fund)
Betty Reed



/*chapter*/Youth and Bahá’í Standards of Behavior
9 July 1973

To a Local Spiritual Assembly

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

133.1 We have received your letter of 19 June 1973 and can sympathize with the problems that Bahá’í youth face when trying to live up to the Bahá’í standards of behaviour. It is, perhaps, natural that in the bewildering amoral environment in which Bahá’í youth are growing up they feel the need for specific instructions on which intimacies are permissible and which are not. However, we feel it would be most unwise for any Bahá’í institution to issue detailed instructions about this.

133.2 The Bahá’í youth should study the teachings on chastity and, with these in mind, should avoid any behaviour which would arouse passions which would tempt them to violate them. In deciding what acts are permissible to them in the light of these considerations the youth must use their own judgement, following the guidance of their consciences and the advice of their parents.

133.3 If Bahá’í youth combine such personal purity with an attitude of uncensorious forbearance towards others they will find that those who may have criticized or even mocked them will come, in time, to respect them. They will, moreover, be laying a firm foundation for future married happiness.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Formation of the National Spiritual Assembly of Equatorial Guinea
18 July 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

134.1 DELIGHTED ANNOUNCE SUCCESSFUL ELECTION NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLY EQUATORIAL GUINEA COUNTRY OPENED FAITH GUARDIAN'S TEN YEAR CRUSADE. NEW ASSEMBLY FORMED NOW RESPONSE REQUIREMENT GOVERNMENT RECOGNITION FAITH. PRAYERS OFFERED HOLY SHRINES THANKSGIVING AND GUIDANCE ASSISTANCE FRIENDS NEWLY INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God John Ferraby
9 September 1973

To the Hands of the Cause of God, the Continental Boards of Counselors, the National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

135.1 The Hand of the Cause John Ferraby passed away suddenly on 5 September. The following cable was sent by the Universal House of Justice:

135.1a REGRET SUDDEN PASSING HAND CAUSE JOHN FERRABY.[1] RECALL LONG SERVICES FAITH BRITISH ISLES CROWNED ELEVATION RANK HAND CAUSE VALUABLE CONTRIBUTION BAHÁ’Í LITERATURE THROUGH HIS BOOK ALL THINGS MADE NEW. REQUESTING BEFITTING GATHERINGS MASHRIQU'L-ADHKARS MEMORIAL MEETINGS ALL COMMUNITIES BAHÁ’Í WORLD.
With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Appointment of the Architect of the Seat of the Universal House of Justice
17 September 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

136.1 DELIGHTED ANNOUNCE APPOINTMENT HUSAYN AMANAT BRILLIANT YOUNG BAHÁ’Í ARCHITECT CRADLE FAITH AS ARCHITECT OF BUILDING FOR UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Expansion and Reinforcement of the Auxiliary Boards
7 October 1973

To the Bahá’ís of the World

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

137.1 In order to meet the growing needs of an ever-expanding Bahá’í World Community we have taken two decisions designed to reinforce and extend the services of the Auxiliary Boards.

137.2 First, the number of Auxiliary Board members throughout the world is to be raised to two hundred and seventy, of whom eighty-one will serve on the Auxiliary Boards for the Protection of the Faith and one hundred and eighty-nine will serve on the Auxiliary Boards for the Propagation of the Faith. In all there will be fifty-four Auxiliary Board members in Africa, eighty-one in the Western Hemisphere, eighty-one in Asia, eighteen in Australasia and thirty-six in Europe.

137.3 Secondly, we have decided to take a further step in the development of the institution by giving to each Continental Board of Counselors the discretion to authorize individual Auxiliary Board members to appoint assistants. Such authorization does not have to be given to all the Auxiliary Board members in a zone nor does the number assigned have to be the same for all Board members; indeed certain Boards of Counselors may decide that the present circumstances in their zones do not require them to take advantage of this possibility. Such matters are left entirely to the discretion of each Continental Board of Counselors.

137.4 The exact nature of the duties and the duration of the appointment of the assistants is also left to each Continental Board to decide for itself. Their aims should be to activate and encourage Local Spiritual Assemblies, to call the attention of Local Spiritual Assembly members to the importance of holding regular meetings, to encourage local communities to meet for the Nineteen Day Feasts and Holy Days, to help deepen their fellow-believers' understanding of the Teachings, and generally to assist the Auxiliary Board members in the discharge of their duties. Appointments may be made for a limited period, such as a year or two, with the possibility of reappointment. Believers can serve at the same time both as assistants to Auxiliary Board members and on administrative institutions.

137.5 It is our prayer at the Sacred Threshold that this new development in the institution of the Auxiliary Boards will lead to an unprecedented strengthening of the Local Spiritual Assemblies throughout the world.

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE


137.6 Numbers of Auxiliary Board Members by Zones
October 1973

Auxiliary Board for 
Protection Propagation

Africa
Northwestern 3 9
Central and East 13 19
Southern 2 8

18 36

Western Hemisphere
North America 9 18
Central America 9 9
South America 9 27

27 54

Asia
Western 9 18
South Central 3 15
Southeastern 3 15
Northeastern 3 15

18 63

Australasia 9 9
Europe 9 27

TOTAL 81 189



/*chapter*/Request for Actions in Preparation for Launching Five Year Plan At Riḍván 1974
21 November 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

138.1 Five months separate us from Riḍván 1974 when the next global plan will be launched. For a period of five years the attention, resources and energies of the Bahá’í World Community will be directed to achieving the aims of this plan.

138.2 By Naw-Rúz 1974 you will have been notified of the overall goals of the plan and the specific tasks assigned to each of your national communities. Each one of you is therefore urged to arrange for a meeting, at Naw-Rúz or soon after, to which you will invite the Board of Counselors in your zone to be represented and at which the plan can be considered and thorough consultation held on the manner in which each one of your communities will launch it.

138.3 You are asked to give careful consideration as soon as possible to the advisability of holding one or more conferences in conjunction with your Convention or soon after. You may wish to consult the Counselors on this matter. We believe that such conferences would greatly assist in acquainting the friends with the nature and aims of the plan and in enlisting their enthusiasm and resolution to achieve it. All details as to the number of such conferences, their timing, their agendas are left entirely to your discretion, but we recommend that in planning them you attach great importance to the participation of youth so that they may feel wholly identified with the tasks assigned and give their immediate and maximum support to their accomplishment.

138.4 Now is the time to begin directing the thoughts and plans of the friends to the next great demand which will be made upon them, and we assure you of our prayers at the Sacred Threshold that you may be guided and strengthened to take such decisions and make such plans as will enable your communities to anticipate with eagerness and receive with joy the new tasks to be offered them, tasks whose wholehearted and united accomplishment will raise the Community of the Most Great Name to a position where it may have far greater effect upon men's minds and prepare it for further thrilling and awe-inspiring achievements in the pursuit of its ultimate goal of the redemption of mankind.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Extension of Gardens at Bahjí
4 December 1973

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

139.1 REJOICE ANNOUNCE FRIENDS BEAUTIFICATION DURING CONFLICT AGITATING MIDDLE EAST FOURTH QUADRANT AREA SURROUNDING MOST HOLY SHRINE EMBRACING OLIVE GROVE SOUTHWEST PILGRIM HOUSE BAHJI BLESSED SHRINE AND MANSION NOW COMPLETELY ENCIRCLED BEAUTIFUL GARDENS INSPIRED BY PATTERN HARAM-I-AQDAS CREATED BY BELOVED GUARDIAN.[1] PRAYING SHRINES SUPPORTERS MOST GREAT NAME EVERY LAND MAY REDOUBLE EFFORTS PROMOTE INTERESTS PRECIOUS FAITH IN ANTICIPATION FIVE YEAR GLOBAL PLAN SOON TO BE LAUNCHED.

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Acceptance of Design for the Seat of the Universal House of Justice	
7 February 1974

To all National Spiritual Assemblies

140.1 JOYFULLY ANNOUNCE ACCEPTANCE EXQUISITE DESIGN CONCEIVED BY HUSAYN AMANAT FOR BUILDING TO SERVE AS PERMANENT SEAT UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE MOUNT CARMEL. DECISION MADE TO PROCEED NEGOTIATE CONTRACTS CONSTRUCTION THIS NOBLE EDIFICE SECOND THOSE BUILDINGS DESTINED ARISE AROUND ARC CONSTITUTE ADMINISTRATIVE CENTER BAHÁ’Í WORLD.[1]

UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



1974-1979 - The Five Year Plan
/*chapter*/Elucidation of Five Year Plan Goals
Naw-Ruz 1974 

To all National Spiritual Assemblies 

Dear Bahá'í Friends, 

142.1 To supplement the message which is being addressed to each of your Communities giving its specific goals under the Five Year Plan, we now share with you a number of elucidations. Certain of the paragraphs which follow may apply to goals which have not been allotted to your community, but it will no doubt be of interest to you to read them in relation to the worldwide scope of the Plan. Opening Localities 

142.2 When choosing localities to be opened to the Faith and when deciding which localities should have Local Spiritual Assemblies, you should bear in mind the need to have the Bahá'í community represented broadly across the area under your jurisdiction. It is likely that some areas will show themselves particularly receptive and numerous Bahá'í communities will speedily arise there, but while fostering such growth you should not neglect those areas in which the Faith is as yet unrepresented. The Development of Local Spiritual Assemblies 

142.3 The institution of the Local Spiritual Assembly is of primary importance in the firm establishment of the Faith, and we hope that you will give particular attention to ensuring that as many as possible, and in increasing numbers, (141-7- WOB, P. 42.) are, in the words of the beloved Guardian, "broad-based, securely grounded" and "efficiently functioning.", The time has come, we believe, when increasing numbers of Local Spiritual Assemblies should assume responsibility for helping the teaching work of groups, isolated believers, and other Spiritual Assemblies in their neighborhood. Such extension teaching goals should be assigned by the National Spiritual Assembly or one of its teaching committees, or can be spontaneously adopted by Local Spiritual Assemblies, and should be carried out within the framework of the overall teaching plans of the country. It should also be made clear that by being given such goals a Spiritual Assembly is not being given any jurisdiction over believers outside its area, still less over other Local Spiritual Assemblies, but is being called upon to collaborate with them in their work. The Recognition of Bahá'í Marriage and Holy Days The Five Year Plan does not include specific goals for the recognition of 

142.5 Bahá'í marriage certificates or of Bahá'í Holy Days because, in most countries where these goals are not already won, achievement depends upon circumstances beyond our control. Nevertheless, National Spiritual Assemblies should bear in mind the need to increase recognition of the Faith and should be alert to possibilities of winning these goals where they are as yet unattained. National Incorporation Goals There are a number of national incorporation goals of the Nine Year Plan 142.6 towards the attainment of which considerable progress has already been made. These have not been included as goals of the Five Year Plan although they are still pending, but of course they should be pursued to completion. 

142.7 Property Acquisitions If acquisition of a National Haziratu'l-Quds is a responsibility assigned to you under the Five Year Plan, you should treat it as an urgent matter in view of the worldwide condition of inflation and rising property costs. Such a building, which must be suitable to serve as the seat of the National Spiritual Assembly, should be purchased as economically as possible. Preferably it should be a freehold detached building, although if such is not obtainable, a semidetached house or an apartment may be considered, or even a property on a long-term lease. A site for a future Mashriqu'l-Adhkar can be as small as 8,000 square meters 142.8 in area if a larger property would be too expensive. It should, if possible, be situated within the city designated or, if this is not feasible, within 25 kilometers from the city 142-1. CF, P. 22. 

142.9 A national endowment should be regarded as an investment in real estate owned by the National Spiritual Assembly. It may be anywhere in the country and can be a small, inexpensive piece of land donated by one of the friends, or else acquired out of the resources of the National Fund. 

142.10 Where we have given a goal to acquire a Haziratu'l-Quds which is to serve the entire community in a certain country, it is to be a local Haziratu'l-Quds at the present time but should be of a size and quality to serve as an administrative center and focal point for the whole community. We envisage that some of such Haziratu'l-Quds may, at a later date, be converted into National Haziratu'l-Quds, and this fact should be borne in mind when acquiring them. 

142.11 In the goal for local Haziratu'l-Quds given to some communities we state that a certain number should be large enough to accommodate activities of a number of communities in the surrounding district. While not being at all in the same category as the Haziratu'l-Quds described in the last paragraph above, these particular buildings are intended to be rather more substantial structures than the average local Haziratu'l-Quds, and should be located in areas which form easily accessible, central gathering places for districts in which large numbers of Bahá'ís are living. In addition to serving as a local Haziratu'l-Quds for its own town or village, such a building can be used for district gatherings, for the holding of teaching institutes, conferences, deepening classes, etc., for the larger area, and could possibly accommodate the office of the district teaching committee. 14212 In general we intend that the local Haziratu'l-Quds called for in the Plan should be very simple structures to serve as focal points and meeting places for the local communities. It is hoped that land for them can be provided by local believers and that they can be built, for the most part, by the local friends. In certain instances the National Spiritual Assembly may feel justified in giving a small amount of assistance from the National Fund. 

142.13 The acquisition of local endowments, which is given as a specific goal to some national communities, is intended to assist in the consolidation of local communities and to foster the spirit of unity and collaboration among the believers. A local endowment can be quite a small piece of land; it can be purchased by the Local Spiritual Assembly or is more usually the gift of one or more of the believers. If the Local 

Spiritual Assembly is incorporated, the endowment should be registered in its name, but if it is not, the endowment can be held by one or more of the believers on behalf of the community. For example, if one of the believers gives a small piece of land he can continue to hold it in his name, but it will be known that he does so on behalf of the Local Spiritual Assembly and that the land will in time be transferred legally to the Assembly when that is possible. In some countries land is owned by the state or the tribe and only the use of the land can be assigned; in such places the goal can be considered achieved if the Local Spiritual Assembly can obtain the use of a plot of land in its own name. In some countries, even if the land can be purchased, government regulations require that within a specific time a building must be erected on land held by religious institutions. This problem can be met in several ways: it may be possible for the Spiritual Assembly to obtain the use Of, or acquire, a plot of land for agricultural purposes, thus avoiding the need to erect a building; or if the most practical course is to erect on the land a Bahá'í institution such as a local Haziratu'l-Quds, the Assembly could, in its own records, demarcate a portion of the land to be the endowment, distinct from the portion on which the Haziratu'l-Quds stands. 

142.14 Dawn Prayers One of the characteristics of Bahá'í society will be the gathering of the believers each day during the hours between dawn and two hours after sunrise to listen to the reading and chanting of the Holy Word. In many communities at the present time, especially in rural ones, such: gatherings would fit naturally into the pattern of the friends' daily life, and where this is the case it would do much to foster the unity of the local community and deepen the friends' knowledge of the Teachings if such gatherings could be organized by the Local Spiritual Assembly on a regular basis. Attendance at these gatherings is not to be obligatory, but we hope that the friends will more and more be drawn to take part in them. This is a goal which can be attained gradually. 

142.15 National Teaching Conferences The holding of regular national teaching conferences has proved to be a valuable stimulus to the work in a number of countries, as well as a means for forging more strongly the bonds of unity among the believers. Beyond this, many national communities are presented with a special opportunity to hold a highly effective teaching conference at the time of the eight Intercontinental Conferences which are being called at the midway point of the Plan. Believers traveling to and from these 

Intercontinental Conferences are likely to be eager to assist the work in the countries through which they pass. Therefore, if you hold a national conference shortly after the Intercontinental Conference which is nearest to you, it may well be attended by believers from other lands who will bring with them the spirit of that Conference, and, by augmenting the numbers attending your national conference will greatly assist its effectiveness as a means of proclaiming the Faith and enthusing those believers who will have been unable to attend the Intercontinental Conferences. 

142.16 Youth-Specific Periods of Service Bahá'í youth should be encouraged to think of their studies and of their training for a trade or profession as part of their service to the Cause of God and in the context of a lifetime that will be devoted to advancing the interests of the Faith. At the same time, during their years of study, youth are often able to offer specific periods of weeks or months, or even of a year or more, during which they can devote themselves to travel teaching or to serving the Bahá'í community in other ways, such as conducting children's classes in remote villages. They should be encouraged to offer such service, which will in itself be admirable experience for the future, and the National Assembly should instruct an appropriate committee to receive such offers and to organize their implementation so as to derive the greatest possible advantage from them. External Affairs Work 

142.17 A very important activity which has been pursued effectively in all too few countries, is the undertaking by the National Spiritual Assembly of a sustained, planned effort to foster cordial relations with prominent people and responsible government officials and to familiarize them personally with the basic tenets and the teachings of the Faith. Such an activity must be carried out with wisdom and discretion, and requires the constant attention of a responsible committee as well as periodic review by the National Spiritual Assembly itself. Where successful it can effectively forestall opposition to the Faith and smooth the way for many essential aspects of the development of the Bahá'í community. Pioneer Goals 

142.18 Enclosed with this letter you will receive a list of pioneer assistance initially called for at the opening of the Plan .2 Any National Spiritual Assembly which has pioneers abroad from previous plans is still responsible for helping them to remain at their posts, or for replacing them, if the services they have been rendering are still needed. However, if you have any still unfilled pioneer goals from the Nine Year Plan or from the current year, you may consider them canceled, because such unfilled goals have been taken into consideration in assigning the goals of the Five Year Plan. Best results can be obtained when pioneer projects are arranged in consultation between the sending and receiving National Spiritual Assemblies or their appropriate committees. 

143.1 With loving Bahá'í 

greetings, 

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE 



/*chapter*/Call for Architects for Houses of Worship in India and Western Samoa
1 APRIL 1974 

To all National Spiritual Assemblies 

Dear Bahá'í Friends, 

The Universal House of Justice will soon be considering the selection of architects for the Mashriqu'l-Adhkar to be erected in India and Samoa. 

143.2 Those wishing to be considered as architects for either of these Temples are invited to submit statements of their qualifications. Such submissions may include examples of work previously designed and/or executed and, if desired, any thoughts or concepts of proposed designs for the Temples may be expressed in whatever way the applicant chooses. 

143.3 The design of each Temple will be developed by the architect selected in relation to the climate, environment and culture of the area where it is to be built. The initiation of construction of these Temples is a goal of the current Five 

143.4 Year Plan, and consequently those interested should for-ward their submissions at an early date to the Universal House of Justice, Bahá'í World Center, PO. Box 155, Haifa 31-000, Israel. Please convey the above message to the friends assembled at your Convention and thereafter to the community at large in whatever way you see fit. 

With loving Bahá'í greetings, THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE 



/*chapter*/Passing of Covenant-Breaker Charles Mason Remey
5 APRIL 1974 

To all National Spiritual Assemblies 

144.1 CHARLES MASON REMEY WHOSE ARROGANT ATTEMPT USURP GUARDIANSHIP AFTER PASSING SHOGHI EFFENDI LED TO HIS EXPULSION FROM RANKS FAITHFUL HAS DIED IN FLORENCE ITALY IN HUNDREDTH YEAR OF HIS LIFE BURIED WITHOUT RELIGIOUS RITES ABANDONED BY ERSTWHILE FOLLOWERS. HISTORY THIS PITIABLE DEFECTION BY ONE WHO HAD RECEIVED GREAT HONORS FROM BOTH MASTER AND GUARDIAN CONSTITUTES YET ANOTHER EXAMPLE FUTILITY ALL ATTEMPTS UNDERMINE IMPREGNABLE COVENANT CAUSE BAHA'U'LLAH. 

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Laws of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas Concerning Men and Women
28 APRIL 1974 

To an individual Believer 

Dear Bahá'í Friend, 

145.1 The various questions you set forth in your letter of 18 February were noted, and we offer you the following comments. 

145.2 The Laws of the Kitab-i-Aqdas, and indeed all the Teachings of the Faith, form a coherent whole; therefore in order to understand their implications they must be considered in their own context. For example, in the case of intestacy, as you have noted, the eldest son receives preferential treatment in certain respects but, as 'Abdu'l-Bahá has explained in one of His Tablets, he should take into consideration the needs of the other heirs. 

145.3 Furthermore it should be remembered that, as Shoghi Effendi has explained (see The World Order of Bahá'u'lláh, page 148), Bahá'u'lláh has deliberately left gaps in the body of His legislative ordinances, to be filled in due course by the Universal House of Justice. 

145.4 You should, therefore, when studying the Synopsis and Codification of the Laws and Ordinances of the Kitab-i-Aqdas, bear these factors in mind, and always remember Bahá'u'lláh's exhortation to "Weigh not the Book of God with such standards and sciences as are current amongst you, for the Book itself is the unerring balance established amongst men. In this most perfect balance whatsoever the peoples and kindreds of the earth possess must be weighed, while the measure of its weight should be tested according to its own standard, did ye but know it."' 

145.5 The equality of men and women, as 'Abdu'l-Bahá has often explained, is a fundamental principle of Bahá'u'lláh; therefore the Laws of the Aqdas should be studied in the light of this. Equality between men and women does not, indeed physiologically it cannot, mean identity of function. In some things women excel men, in others men are better than women, while in very many things the difference in sex is of no effect at all. The differences are most apparent in family life. The capacity for motherhood has many far-reaching effects. For example, because of this, daughters receive preference in education over sons. Again, for physiological reasons, women are granted exemptions from fasting that are not applied to men. 

145.6 It is apparent from the Guardian's writings that where Bahá'u'lláh has expressed a law as between a man and a woman it applies, mutatis mutandis ("with due alteration of details") (145-1. SC, p. 22,; see also KA T99. 2) between a woman and a man unless the context should make this impossible. For example, the text of the Kitab-i-Aqdas forbids a man to marry his father's wife (i.e., his stepmother), and the Guardian has indicated that likewise a woman is forbidden to marry her stepfather. In the case you cite, however, that of a wife who is found by her husband not to have been a virgin, the dissolution of the marriage can be demanded only "If the marriage has been conditioned on virginity'; presumably, therefore, if the wife wishes to exercise such a right in respect to the husband, she would have to include a condition as to his virginity in the marriage contract, and this would seem to be one of those matters on which the Universal House of Justice will have to legislate in due course. 

145.7 Although the Universal House of Justice has to apply and supplement the laws of the Aqdas, it has no right at all to change any law that Bahá'u'lláh has specifically revealed. 

146.1 As clearly stated by the Guardian, the provisions of the Kitab-1-Aqdas "remain inviolate" during the entire Dispensation . . . .

With loving Bahá'í greetings, THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Memorandum on Establishing and Operating a Bahá’í Publishing Trust
13 MAY 1974 The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá'ís of the United States 

Dear Bahá'í Friends, 

The goal of the Five Year Plan to establish six new Publishing Trusts is by now known to you; these new publishing agencies are to be established in Australia, the Fiji Islands, Japan, Korea, the Philippines and Malaysia. We have just sent to these six National Spiritual Assemblies the attached 

146.2 Memorandum on Establishing and Operating a Bahá'í Publishing Trust, together with our Memorandum of March 28, 1971. We now enclose both these memoranda solely for your information. It is possible that some of the six National Spiritual Assemblies charged with this goal may apply to any one of you for information about the structure and operation of your own publishing agency and we feel sure you will answer any questions they may ask. 

With loving Bahá'í greetings, THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE

146.3 1.The name "Bahá'í Publishing Trust" does not require the establishment of a Trust in the legal sense, and, in fact, more than one Bahá'í publishing agency is not called a Trust. (146.4 2).By whatever name it is called the objective is to establish a publishing agency, under the complete control and direction of the National Spiritual Assembly. 146.5 3.The difference between a Bahá'í Publishing Trust and any other Committee of the National Spiritual Assembly lies chiefly in the fact that the publishing agency does not operate on a budget from the National Spiritual Assembly but is established as a business with its own capital (whose sources are listed at 6 below), trading in the publishing and sale of Bahá'í literature and allied items, and the results of this trading remain within its own financial structure. It is a business, owned by the National Spiritual Assembly, to carry out its publishing requirements. 146.6 4. While it may first be set up as a Committee the aim should be to form some association, legally established, by which the National Spiritual Assembly may act as a publisher. This may be achieved either through the National Spiritual Assembly's own incorporation or by the establishment of a separate legal entity with the National Spiritual Assembly having full control. But in any case legal advice must be sought. 146.7 5.The Company or Trust must be a non-profit-making organization, that is to say all proceeds from its transactions must be used for such things as paying salaries and other operational expenses, royalties and interests on loans and augmenting its own capital. It is not operated for individual profit. Capitalization 146.8 6. Since the agency is to be operated solely for Bahá'í purposes, capital funds may not be received from non-Bahá'ís, although of course the aim is to sell books to the largest possible public. Capital may be obtained from: a) Grants from the National Spiritual Assembly b) Gifts from individual Bahá'ís or from Spiritual Assemblies c) Profit from trading 

d) Loans from Bahá'ís or Bahá'í institutions. Such loans may be interest free or interest bearing but for every loan there must be a written contract setting out the terms of the loan, its duration, condition of repayment and all details. e) Taking over any publishing assets (stock, outstanding accounts, etc.) which your National Spiritual Assembly or one of your Committees may at present have. Production 7- Publishing is not the same as printing or manufacturing books. The publisher engages manufacturing firms to produce his books according to his-the publisher's-design and specifications. The actual production and distribution of books need not be confined to the country in which the Publishing Trust operates. The printing and binding may be done anywhere it is deemed most feasible economically, and from the point of view of control, quality, economy and financial arrangements. Publishing Program 8.Bahá'í literature comprises in general the Sacred Text (works of Bahá'u'lláh, the Bab, 'Abdu'l-Bahá); the Guardian's writings; letters and publications of the Universal House of Justice; introductory and explanatory works; historical works; teaching pamphlets and other teaching literature. The purpose of establishing Bahá'í publishing agencies throughout the world is to make a wide range of such material available to everybody. The specific program you must devise will therefore take into consideration the following factors: a) What are the prevailing languages in your area of jurisdiction. b) Will other National Spiritual Assemblies be interested in your publications. c) What are your immediate needs for teaching and study of the Faith. d) What literature useful to you already exists. e) Reviewing. Under a) You will need to consider a program of translation and we refer you to our Memorandum of 28 March 1971. (146-1. See message no. 94.) 

b) If the answer is yes, you will need to consult any such National Spiritual Assembly with a view to establishing priorities and enlisting their help in translating. c) Together with b) and d) should enable you to establish a publishing program by priority of need. d) If you can, with reasonable ease, obtain needed literature from other Bahá'í Publishing Trusts you should obviously do so and use your own resources for publishing items not available elsewhere. Your own publishing agency should buy such material at wholesale prices and re-sell it to Local Spiritual Assemblies and individuals. e) Everything published must be approved; see our Memorandum of 28 March 1971 Financial Program 146.12 9. An appeal may be made to all the believers under your jurisdiction, as well as to any National Spiritual Assemblies under 8 b) above, to support the new publishing agency. In addition to such an appeal a general invitation to the friends may be issued to take up loans, see 6 d) above. 

146.13 Proper accounts must be kept and a Profit and Loss Account and a Balance Sheet drawn up and audited every year. 

146.14 Pricing of publications. Two objectives have to be balanced against each other, namely, to make Bahá'í literature available at as low a price as possible and to build up a sound business. Retail prices will have to cover a) production costs b) operating expenses (see 5) c) discounts allowed d) a small profit to repay loans and build up capital. 

146.15 Postage on books. Cost of postage or freight may either be charged directly to the customer or included in the selling price. 

146.16 If the National Spiritual Assembly wishes to sell a book at less than the commercial retail price, it should subsidize its Publishing Trust so that the Trust itself will incur no loss. Management 146.17 10. The Publishing Trust should be managed by a Committee, appointed by your National Spiritual Assembly and directly responsible to you. Ideally it should have in its membership one believer capable of acting as general manager and conducting the business of the Trust on behalf of the Committee. At the outset it may not be possible to make this a full-time position or to offer a salary to the manager, but this point should be borne in mind as the business of the Trust increases and its volume of sales justifies such an expense. Perhaps it may be possible to find some competent believer who, for the present, would make the management of the Publishing Trust his or her Bahá'í service. The above are not hard and fast rules but guidelines for consideration. The 146-18 important thing is to tackle at once the problem of supplying literature to support the all-important work of teaching and study of the Cause. The Sacred Text, the Guardian's writings, expository and historical works are all essential to the propagation and promotion of the Faith.



/*chapter*/Laws of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas Not Binding in the West
9 JUNE 1974 The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá'ís of Iceland 

Dear Bahá'í Friends, 

Thank you for your letter Of 4 March 1974 enclosing the inquiry from the 

147.1 Bahá'í Group of Isafjorour. It has become apparent from a number of questions we have received that many believers are not clear which are those laws already binding upon the Bahá'ís in the West. We therefore feel it is timely to clarify the situation, and the simplest way is to state those laws listed in the Synopsis and Codification of the Kitab-i-Aqdas which are not at present binding upon the friends in the western world. For ease of reference we give the numbers of the sections listed. IVA. (4) (c)The law regarding the exemption from obligatory prayer granted 147.2 to women in their courses. 

147.3 IVA.(10)The law concerning ablutions, with the exception of the ablutions required for the Medium Obligatory Prayer which are described in Section CLXXKII of Prayers and Meditations and are required for the recitation of that prayer. IV.A.(i2)The law concerning actions to be taken in place of an Obligatory 

147.4 Prayer missed on account of insecure conditions. IV. B. (5) (a) The definition of travelers for the purpose of exemption from fasting. Instead of these definitions the believers in the West should observe the following guidance given by the beloved Guardian's secretary on his behalf: "travelers are exempt from fasting, but if they want to fast while they are traveling, they are free to do so. You are exempt the whole period of your travel, not just the hours you are in a train or car, etc. . . .", 

147.6 IV.B.(5)(f)The law regarding the exemption from fasting granted to women in their courses. 

147.7 IV.C.(1)(i) The laws governing betrothal. 

147.8 IV.C.(i)(j)The law concerning the payment of a dowry by the groom to the bride on marriage. 

147.9 N.C.(i)(1)and (in) The laws concerning the traveling of a husband away from his wife. 

147.10 IV.C.(i)(n) and (o) The laws relating to the virginity of the wife.

147.11 IV.C(2)(b) That part of the divorce law relating to fines payable to the House of justice. 

147.12 IV.C.(3)The law of inheritance. This is normally covered by civil laws of intestacy at the present time. 147.13 

IVD.(i)(a) The law of pilgrimage. 

147.14 N.D.W(b) The law of Huququ'llah is not yet applied to the western friends.,-147.15 

IV.D.(i)(d) The law of the Mashriqu'l-Adhkar is gradually being put into effect.

147.16 IV.D.(i)(f) The Bahá'í Festivals are being celebrated by the western friends on their anniversaries in the Gregorian calendar until such time as the Universal House of Justice deems it desirable to pass supplementary legislation necessary for the full implementation of the Badi' calendar. 

147.17 IV.D.(i)(j)The age of maturity applies only to Bahá'í religious duties as yet.3 On other matters it is subject to the civil law of each country. The age of administrative maturity in the Bahá'í community has, for the time being, been fixed at 21. 147-1. LG, P. 234. 147-2. See message dated 6 August 1984 on the introduction of Huqdq011h to the West (no. 404), and message dated 4 July 1985 introducing a compilation on Huququ'llah (no. 430). For the compilation, see CC 1:489-527. 147-3. 

147.18 For more information on the responsibilities of youth at the age of maturity, see message no. 426. 

IVD.(i)(k) For the burial of the dead the only requirements now binding in the West are to bury the body (not to cremate it), not to carry it more than a distance of one hour's journey from the place of death, and to say the Prayer for the Dead if the deceased is a believer over the age Of 15. IV. D. (I) (p) The law of tithes. 

147.19 IV D. (I) (q) The law concerning the repetition of the Greatest Name 95 times 147.20 a day. IV. D. (I) (r) The law concerning the hunting of animals. 147,21 IV. 

147.22 D. (I) (t), (u), (v) and (w) The laws relating to the finding of lost property, the disposition of treasure trove, the disposal of objects held in trust and compensation for manslaughter are all designed for a future state of society. These matters are usually covered by the civil law of each country. IV. 

147.23 D. (I) (y) (xiv),(xv),(xvi) and (xvii) Arson, adultery, murder and theft are all forbidden to Bahá'ís but the punishments prescribed for them in the Kit6b-i-Aqdas are designed for a future state of society. Such matters are usually covered by the civil laws of each country. IV. D. (I) (y) (xxv), (xxx), (xxxi) and (xxxii) The laws prohibiting the use of the 147.24 type of pools which used to be found in Persian baths, the plunging of one's hand in food, the shaving of one's head and the growth of men's hair below the lobe of the car. 

147.25 All the exhortations, listed in section IVD.W, a-re applicable universally at the present time insofar as it is possible for the friends to implement them; for example, the exhortation to teach one's children to chant the Holy Verses in the Mashriqu'l-Adhkar can be literally carried out only on a limited scale at the present time, but the friends should, vertheless, teach their children the Holy Writings as far as possible. 

With loving Bahá'í greetings, THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE 



/*chapter*/Revision of the Functions of Continental Pioneer Committees
22 JULY 1974 

To all National Spiritual Assemblies 

Dear Bahá'í Friends, 

148.1 In view of the ever-increasing number of pioneers and traveling teachers now arising from various countries to serve the Cause of God in widely scattered lands throughout all continents the Universal House of Justice has considered ways of deriving maximum benefit from the services of these devoted believers, coordinating their efforts and anticipating the needs of the future. 

148.2 The Continental Boards of Counselors will soon be approaching you about the need for pioneers and traveling teachers for the period ending Ridvan 1976. 

148.3 The functions of the Continental Pioneer Committees have been reviewed and developed in a way that will enable them to operate in closer collaboration with the Continental Boards of Counselors and the National Spiritual Assemblies of their areas. A copy of the statement outlining the functions of the Continental Pioneer Committees as now revised is attached for your information. As you will note, the members of these Committees will henceforth be appointed by the Universal House of Justice.
Nothing in the functions now assigned to the Continental Pioneer Committees in any way detracts from the primary responsibility of National Spiritual Assemblies to foster and promote pioneering and traveling teaching. 

148.4 It is our hope and prayer that as the Five Year Plan unfolds evidences of closer ties of cooperation ong the various institutions of the Faith will be increasingly witnessed in every land. 

With loving Bahá'í greetings, 

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE 



/*chapter*/The Lesser Peace and "the Calamity"
29 JULY 1974 The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá'ís of the United States 

Dear Bahá'í Friends, 

We have received your letter of 19 June 1974 describing the preoccupation of some American believers with the date of the Lesser Peace, and with their feeling that "the calamity," as a prelude to that peace, is imminent. 

149.2 It is true that 'Abdu'l-Bahá made statements linking the establishment of the unity of nations to the twentieth century. For example: "The fifth candle is the unity of nations a unity which, in this century, will be securely established, causing all the peoples of the world to regard themselves as citizens of one common fatherland.", And, in The Promised Day Is Come, following a similar statement quoted from Some Answered Questions, Shoghi Effendi makes this comment: "This is the stage which the world is now approaching, the stage of world unity, which, as 'Abdu'l-Bahá assures us, will, in this century, be securely established. "2 There is also this statement from a letter written in 1946 to an individual 149.3 believer on behalf of the beloved Guardian by his secretary: All we know is that the Lesser and the Most Great Peace will come their exact dates we do not know. The same is true as regards the possibility of a future war; we cannot state dogmatically it will or will not take place-all we know is that mankind must suffer and be punished sufficiently to make it turn to God. 

149.4 It is apparent that the disintegration of the old order is accelerating, but the friends should not permit this inevitable process to deter them from giving their undivided attention to the tasks lying immediately before them. Let them take heart from the reassuring words of Shoghi Effendi contained in the closing paragraphs of his momentous ssage of June 5, 1947, and concentrate on the challenging tasks of this hour.3 

With loving Bahá'í greetings, 

THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE 



/*chapter*/Passing of Laura Dreyfus-Barney, Compiler of Some Answered Questions
22 AUGUST 1974 

To the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá'ís of France 

150.1 ASCENSION DISTINGUISHED MAIDSERVANT LAURA DREYFUS-BARNEY FURTHER DEPLETES SMALL BAND PROMOTERS FAITH HEROIC AGE. MEMBER FIRST HISTORIC GROUP PARIS TAUGHT BY MAY MAXWELL SHE ACHIEVED IMMORTAL FAME THROUGH COMPILATION SOME ANSWERED QUESTIONS UNIQUE ENTIRE FIELD RELIGIOUS HISTORY. OFFERING ARDENT PRAYERS SACRED THRESHOLD PROGRESS HER SOUL ABHA KINGDOM URGE ALL COMMUNITIES FRANCE HOLD MEMORIAL GATHERINGS GRATITUDE OUTSTANDING ACHIEVEMENT. 
UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE 



/*chapter*/Comments on the Bahá’í Attitude Toward Material Suffering
19 November 1974

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Italy

Dear Bahá’í friends,

151.1 In your letter of 11 September you say that the questions of how to help the Third World or the poor who are suffering under calamities are much discussed in your community and you wish to know whether to create a special fund for such needs, to ask for special contributions from time to time, or whether there are other ways in which you could help.

151.2 It is understandable that Bahá’ís who witness the miserable conditions under which so many human beings have to live, or who hear of a sudden disaster that has struck a certain area of the world, are moved to do something practical to ameliorate those conditions and to help their suffering fellow-mortals.

151.3 There are many ways in which help can be rendered. Every Bahá’í has the duty to acquire a trade or profession through which he will earn that wherewith he can support himself and his family; in the choice of such work he can seek those activities which are of benefit to his fellowmen and not merely those which promote his personal interests, still less those whose effects are actually harmful.

151.4 There are also the situations in which an individual Bahá’í or a Spiritual Assembly is confronted with an urgent need which neither justice nor compassion could allow to go unheeded and unhelped. How many are the stories told of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in such situations, when He would even take off a garment He was wearing and give it to a shivering man in rags.

151.5 But in our concern for such immediate obvious calls upon our succour we must not allow ourselves to forget the continuing, appalling burden of suffering under which millions of human beings are always groaning―a burden which they have borne for century upon century and which it is the mission of Bahá’u’lláh to lift at last. The principal cause of this suffering, which one can witness wherever one turns, is the corruption of human morals and the prevalence of prejudice, suspicion, hatred, untrustworthiness, selfishness and tyranny among men. It is not merely material well- being that people need. What they desperately need is to know how to live their lives―they need to know who they are, to what purpose they exist, and how they should act towards one another; and, once they know the answers to these questions they need to be helped to gradually apply these answers to everyday behaviour. It is to the solution of this basic problem of mankind that the greater part of all our energy and resources should be directed. There are mighty agencies in this world, governments, foundations, institutions of many kinds with tremendous financial resources which are working to improve the material lot of human beings. Anything we Bahá’ís could add to such resources in the way of special funds or contributions would be a negligible drop in the ocean. However, alone among men we have the divinely given remedy for the real ills of mankind; no one else is doing or can do this most important work, and if we divert our energy and our funds into fields in which others are already doing more than we can hope to do, we shall be delaying the diffusion of the Divine Message which is the most important task of all.

151.6 Because of such an attitude, and also because of our refusal to become involved in politics, Bahá’ís are often accused of holding aloof from the "real problems" of their fellowmen. But when we hear this accusation let us not forget that those who make it are usually idealistic materialists to whom material good is the only "real" good, whereas we know that the working of the material world is merely a reflection of spiritual conditions and until the spiritual conditions can be changed there can be no lasting change for the better in material affairs.

151.7 We should also remember that most people have no clear concept of the sort of world they wish to build, nor how to go about building it. Even those who are concerned to improve conditions are therefore reduced to combating every apparent evil that takes their attention. Willingness to fight against evils, whether in the form of conditions or embodied in evil men, has thus become for most people the touchstone by which they judge a person's moral worth. Bahá’ís, on the other hand, know the goal they are working towards and know what they must do, step by step, to attain it. Their whole energy is directed towards the building of the good, a good which has such a positive strength that in the face of it the multitude of evils―which are in essence negative―will fade away and be no more. To enter into the quixotic tournament of demolishing one by one the evils in the world is, to a Bahá’í, a vain waste of time and effort. His whole life is directed towards proclaiming the Message of Bahá’u’lláh, reviving the spiritual life of his fellowmen, uniting them in a divinely created World Order, and then, as the Order grows in strength and influence, he will see the power of that Message transforming the whole human society and progressively solving the problems and removing the injustices which have so long bedevilled the world.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
THE UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE



/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Opposition
/*chapter*/Formation of Five New National Spiritual Assemblies during Riḍván 1975 and Readjustment of the Zones of African Continental Boards of Counselors
/*chapter*/Acquisition of the House of 'Abdu'llah Pasha in 'Akka
/*chapter*/Call for Pioneers
/*chapter*/Acquisition of Land Adjacent to the Guardian's Resting-Place in London
/*chapter*/The Significance of the House of 'Abdu'llah Pasha
/*chapter*/A Plan for International Collaboration in Traveling Teaching
/*chapter*/Fiftieth Anniversary of the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States
/*chapter*/Safeguarding the Letters of Shoghi Effendi
/*chapter*/Comments on the Progress of the Five Year Plan
/*chapter*/Representation of the Universal House of Justice by Hands of the Cause of God at International Conferences
/*chapter*/Significance of the Seat of the Universal House of justice
/*chapter*/Excavation of the Site of the Seat of the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Laws of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas Concerning Men and Women; Membership on the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation of Prayers and Tablets for Children and Youth
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Bahá’í Meetings and the Nineteen Day Feast
/*chapter*/Naw-Ruz Message 1976
/*chapter*/Appointments to Continental Boards of Counselors and Auxiliary Boards
/*chapter*/Message to the International Teaching Conference, Helsinki, Finland-July 1976
/*chapter*/Message to the International Teaching Conference, Anchorage, Alaska-July 1976
/*chapter*/Comments on the Subject of Politics
/*chapter*/Message to the International Teaching Conference, Paris, France-August 1976
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Bahá’í Education
/*chapter*/Message to the, International Teaching Conference, Nairobi, Kenya-September 1976
/*chapter*/Visit of His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II to the Resting-Place of Shoghi Effendi
/*chapter*/Outstanding Achievements in Khurasan, Iran
/*chapter*/Achievement of the Majority of Pioneer Goals at Midpoint of Five Year Plan
/*chapter*/Additional Appointments to Continental Boards of Counselors
/*chapter*/Message to the International Teaching Conference, Hong Kong-November 1976
/*chapter*/Grappling with the Challenge of Consolidation
/*chapter*/Call for a Vigorous Traveling Teaching Program
/*chapter*/Message to the International Teaching Conference, Auckland, New Zealand-January 1977
/*chapter*/Message to the International Teaching Conference, Bahia, Brazil-January 1977
/*chapter*/Signature of Contract for Erection of the Seat of the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Message to the International Teaching Conference, Merida, Mexico-February 1977
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on the Individual and Teaching
/*chapter*/Consolidation of Local Spiritual Assemblies; Formation at Any Time during Riḍván
/*chapter*/Call for Pioneers
/*chapter*/Commemoration of the Centenary of the Termination of Bahá’u’lláh's Confinement in 'Akka
/*chapter*/Murder of an Iranian Homefront Pioneer
/*chapter*/Collaboration between Auxiliary Board Members and National and Regional Teaching Committees
/*chapter*/Reconstruction of Society
/*chapter*/Ceremony for Laying the Foundation Stone of the Mother Temple of the Indian Subcontinent
/*chapter*/Message to Women's Conference, New Delhi
/*chapter*/Appointment of Architects for the Mother Temple of the Indian Subcontinent and the Restoration of the House of 'Abdu'llah Pasha
/*chapter*/Formation of New and Lapsed Assemblies throughout the Year
/*chapter*/Appointment of New Counselor in Southeastern Asia
/*chapter*/Announcement of Initiation of Broadcasting by First Bahá’í Radio Station
/*chapter*/Message of Greetings to Hemispheric Bahá’í Radio-Television Conference
/*chapter*/Comments on First International Bahá’í Women's Conference in South America
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Bahá’í Consultation
/*chapter*/Inauguration of Radio Bahá’í Ecuador
/*chapter*/Elucidation of Bahá’í Teachings on Ranks and Stations
/*chapter*/Message to the International Convention-Riḍván 1978
/*chapter*/Message to the National Conventions-Riḍván 1978
/*chapter*/Election of the Universal House of Justice-Riḍván 1978
/*chapter*/Appointment of Architect for House of Worship in Western Samoa
/*chapter*/Love for God and Bahá’u’lláh
/*chapter*/Inclusion of Mother Temple of the West in National Register of Historic Places
/*chapter*/Inauguration of Radio Bahá’í Ecuador
/*chapter*/Directing the Course of One's Life
/*chapter*/The Grave Peril Facing Bahá’ís and Holy Places in Iran
/*chapter*/Announcement of Decision to Launch a Seven Year Plan
/*chapter*/Bahá’í Scholarship
/*chapter*/Persecution of the Bahá’ís of Iran
/*chapter*/Extension of Permission to Form Local Spiritual Assemblies under Certain Conditions during Riḍván
/*chapter*/Refutation of False Accusations against Iranian Bahá’ís

1979-1986 - The Seven Year Plan
/*chapter*/Elucidation of Seven Year Plan Goals
Naw-Rúz 1979

To National Spiritual Assemblies

Beloved Friends,

1.  In the message of the Universal House of Justice to the Baha'is of the world and in its letters to individual communities setting the goals of the first phase of the Seven Year Plan are a number of references which it wishes to amplify for your guidance. Not all will apply to every national Baha'i community, but you will all undoubtedly find interest in reading even those which do not immediately apply to your specific situation. The points we have been asked to set forth are as follows.

Local Spiritual Assemblies

2.  In August 1970 the House of Justice sent to all National Spiritual Assemblies a compilation of the words of Baha'u'llah, 'Abdu'l-Baha and Shoghi Effendi on the Local Spiritual Assembly. To supplement this fundamental and most important guidance we now enclose a compilation of extracts from the letters of the Universal House of Justice written between 1966 and 1975, covering the importance of Local Spiritual Assemblies, their development, the supporting role of the Auxiliary Board members and their assistants, and suggested goals for Local Assemblies.

3.  In selecting goal towns for the formation of Local Spiritual Assemblies a National Assembly should ensure that there will be a wide distribution of Local Assemblies throughout the country.

4.  National Assemblies should consider calling upon every Local Assembly to meet at least once every Baha'i month, and to appoint a local teaching committee wherever it is desirable to do so and has not already been done.

Pioneers and Traveling Teachers

5.  The need for the services of pioneers and traveling teachers remains very great. In the goals for the initial two-year phase of the Plan few specific assignments for the sending of pioneers and traveling teachers have been made. In recent years a steady stream has begun to flow, and the Universal House of Justice calls upon the followers of Baha'u'llah in the stronger national communities to arise to join this stream. Enclosed are two lists showing those countries which are particularly in need of pioneers and traveling teachers at the present time. You should publish these as soon as possible. They are also being supplied to the Continental Pioneer Committees, and those friends who arise will be able to decide upon their area of service in consultation with their National Assembly and the appropriate committees. The international funds of the Faith are now very limited, and this adds to the need for pioneers and traveling teachers to be self-supporting.

Youth Teaching

6.  Experience has shown that youth can render valuable service in many activities of the community, and particularly in taking the message to the members of their own generation. Those in schools and universities have many opportunities to teach their fellow students and faculty members, and many can be particularly effective by attending a school or university in a pioneer goal. During vacations youth can often render outstanding services as traveling teachers. Traveling in teams has been very useful.

Border Teaching

7.  It is very important that there be collaborative teaching between national Baha'i communities in border areas, both by travel teaching across the border and in the organization of joint teaching campaigns on both sides of it. Each National Spiritual Assembly should study this possibility and, if it finds such projects profitable, should seek the collaboration of its sister National Assemblies and request the advice and assistance of the Continental Board of Counselors.

Teaching Conferences

8.  These conferences, whether national or regional, in addition to providing good opportunities for fanning the enthusiasm of the friends and fostering their unity, have been effectively used by many National Assemblies as working conferences where reports are given of the status of the goals of the Plan and of the urgent needs and priorities; and, where necessary, calls are raised for pioneers, traveling teachers and funds.

Summer and Winter Schools

9.  The Guardian once described the institution of the Summer School in a letter written on his behalf, as "a vital and inseparable part of any teaching campaign." In April 1972 the House of justice issued a compilation on the importance of Baha'i Summer Schools, and it commends this to every National Spiritual Assembly for study. In only a few countries has it been possible or timely to acquire properties to house Summer and Winter Schools; in most they are still held in rented premises, and the House of Justice stresses the importance of holding them at as low a cost as possible in a place that is easily accessible to the friends, so that large numbers of believers and inquirers can attend. It is hoped that this activity will become at least an annual feature of the Baha'i community life in every land.

The Baha'i Education of Children

10.  It is important to hold regular Baha'i children's classes to give the children a thorough grounding in knowledge of the teachings and history of the Faith, to imbue them with its spirit, to establish loving ties between them and to provide them with that firm foundation in the Faith which will enable them to grow up as staunch and enlightened servants of Baha'u'llah. Non-Baha'i parents will often welcome the opportunity of having their children take part in such classes, and this, in addition to the benefit it confers upon the children, may well be a means of attracting their parents to the Faith.

Tutorial Schools

11.  This is a term, originally adopted in the Baha'i community of India, to describe the simple type of school, organized and conducted under the auspices of the Baha'i administrative institutions, wherein one teacher is employed to conduct classes in reading and writing and elementary subjects for the Baha'i and non-Baha'i children in a village. In addition to the academic subjects he also conducts Baha'i classes for the children and, in his spare time, makes a valuable contribution to the teaching and consolidation work in his own and neighboring Baha'i communities. The school may be held in the open air, in one of the houses of the Baha'is, in the local Haziratu'l-Quds, or in a simple building constructed for the purpose, as conditions allow.

12.  The teacher's salary as well as the other costs of the school are provided out of fees paid by the parents, supplemented, if necessary and possible, by allocations from the local or national funds.

13.  In the Tablet of the World Baha'u'llah states that "Everyone, whether man or woman, should hand over to a trusted person a portion of what he or she earneth through trade, agriculture or other occupation, for the training and education of children, to be spent for this purpose with the knowledge of the Trustees of the House of Justice." In many countries this duty is fulfilled through the taxes that the government levies for the support of the state educational system, but there are other lands where no such facilities are provided and the Local Spiritual Assemblies may well begin to fulfill this aspect of their duties by encouraging the local friends to contribute to a special education fund which can be used for the support of tutorial schools or to assist the children of indigent believers to obtain schooling.

Publications

14.  Every National Spiritual Assembly should have a well conceived plan for the provision and dissemination of a balanced supply of Baha'i literature for the believers and for the teaching work. In translation and publication, priority should be given to the Sacred Texts and the writings of Shoghi Effendi, for without access to the life-giving waters of the Holy Word, how are the believers to deepen in their understanding of the Teachings and convey them accurately to others?

Recordings

15.  In addition to the publication of Texts and teaching materials for the friends, it would be helpful in areas where the degree of literacy is not high, to find ways to teach the friends Baha'i songs, poems, stories and brief quotations from the Writings as well as prayers. This can be done through the use of cassette tapes or radio broadcasts.

16.  The goal given to certain national communities to make recordings of the Holy Texts is not intended to imply the large-scale production of cassette tapes but rather the development of locally based programs for the recording on cassette tapes of passages in the indigenous languages. Such tapes can then be carried by traveling teachers to outlying areas, used in the teaching work, or left behind if there are tape-recorders locally available.

Communications

17.  Keeping the friends informed of the news of the Faith is so important that every National Assembly is urged to devote attention to the prompt and regular dissemination of its national newsletter, supplemented, where necessary and feasible, by regional and local news organs. Some National Assemblies have also found that cassette recordings can be useful for communicating with friends in outlying areas, and radio programs can, of course, fulfill a similar purpose.

Correspondence Courses

18.  Such courses have proved their usefulness both for teaching the Faith and deepening the knowledge of the believers, and their production has been given as a goal to some national communities. If any National Assembly assigned this goal is not certain how to proceed, it may consult with the Continental Board of Counselors or write to the Universal House of Justice which will put it in touch with those National Assemblies most likely to be able to help.

Properties

19.  Many properties have already been acquired in the course of previous plans. It is important that these properties be properly maintained in good repair. National Spiritual Assemblies should set aside sums annually in their budgets for the maintenance of national properties so that when a repair becomes necessary the funds will be available without creating a sudden crisis for the national fund. As far as possible, local Haziratu'l-Quds and other local properties should be kept up by the local friends themselves.

20.  It is also important to make full use of the properties of the Faith for the purposes for which they were acquired. Well maintained and regularly used properties will not only be a means of fostering Baha'i community life, but will add to the prestige and dignity of the Faith in the eyes of the non-Baha'i public.

21.  A number of properties called for in the Five Year Plan, such as district and local Haziratu'l-Quds and local endowments, have not yet been acquired, usually as a result of local circumstances beyond the control of the friends. These goals should continue to be diligently pursued so that they will be attained as soon as conditions permit. If there are insuperable difficulties which make such a property unobtainable in the foreseeable future, a full report should be sent to the Universal House of Justice.

22.  For goals requiring the acquisition of additional local Haziratu'l-Quds during the initial phase of the Seven Year Plan, no budget has been provided for assistance from the International Fund.

23.  The Universal House of Justice is eagerly anticipating an upsurge of activity in the years ahead, and assures you all of its fervent prayers in the Holy Shrines for the rapid progress of all aspects of the new Plan.

With loving Baha'i greetings,

DEPARTMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT



/*chapter*/Member of the Universal House of Justice to Address Significant Meetings in North America and Europe
/*chapter*/Living a Chaste and Holy Life
/*chapter*/Seizure of the House of the Bab
/*chapter*/Call for Prayers for the Bahá’ís of Iran
/*chapter*/The Increasing Dangers Facing Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Advice on Use of Pioneers and Traveling Teachers
/*chapter*/The Setting of Counselors' Terms of Service
/*chapter*/New Member of International Teaching Center
/*chapter*/Conversion of Iranian National Bahá’í Headquarters into an Islamic University
/*chapter*/Call for Pioneers
/*chapter*/Release of Bahá’í Prisoners in Baghdad
/*chapter*/Effects of Bahá’í Actions on the Situation in Iran
/*chapter*/Demolition of the House of the Bab
/*chapter*/Results of Significant Meetings Addressed by Member of the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Assassination of the Hand of the Cause of God Enoch Olinga
/*chapter*/Omission of Bahá’ís as a Recognized Religious Minority from Iranian Constitution
/*chapter*/Refutation of Accusations against Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Inspiring the Heart
/*chapter*/Demolition of the House of the Bib and Adjacent Bahá’í Properties
/*chapter*/Excavation of Temple Site in Western Samoa
/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Rahmatu'llah Muhajir
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Divorce
/*chapter*/Passing of Inparaju Chinniah, Continental Counselor
/*chapter*/Message to Iranian Bahá’ís throughout the World
/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Hasan M. Balyuzi
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on the Importance of Prayer, Meditation, and the Devotional Attitude
/*chapter*/Contract for Construction of the Indian Temple
/*chapter*/Comments on the Kitáb-i-Aqdas
/*chapter*/Our Attitude and Actions toward the Impending Catastrophe
/*chapter*/Ominous Increase in Pressures on Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Execution of Two Members of the Tabriz Spiritual Assembly
/*chapter*/Vigorous Steps Taken in Defense of the Bahá’ís of Iran
/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Adelbert Muhlschlegel
/*chapter*/Commencement of Construction of Indian Temple
/*chapter*/Translation of the Long Healing Prayer and the Fire Tablet
/*chapter*/Arrest of National Spiritual Assembly of Iran and Two Auxiliary Board Members
/*chapter*/Another False Accusation against the Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Martyrdom of Seven Bahá’ís in Yazd
/*chapter*/Defense of the Bahá’ís of Iran in Le Monde
/*chapter*/Worldwide Response to Iranian Persecutions
/*chapter*/Property Acquisitions in the Holy Land
/*chapter*/Passing of Leonora Stirling Armstrong, Spiritual Mother of South America
/*chapter*/Attendance of the Members of a Spiritual Assembly at Its Meetings
/*chapter*/Further Development of the Continental Boards of Counselors
/*chapter*/Martyrdom of Rida Firuzi in Tabriz; Uncertainty of Whereabouts of National Assembly Members
/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Abu'l-Qasim Faizi
/*chapter*/Immolation of Bahá’í Couple in Nuk Village
/*chapter*/Message to Counselors' Convocations on Five Continents
/*chapter*/Relationship between Husband and Wife
/*chapter*/Assassination of Dr. Manuchihr Hakim, Chairman of Iranian National Spiritual Assembly
/*chapter*/Events Related to the Execution of Dr. Manuchihr Hakim
/*chapter*/Second Phase of the Seven Year Plan
/*chapter*/Return of the Hand of the Cause of God William Sears to Africa
/*chapter*/Execution of Two Bahá’ís in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Attendance of Bahá’ís from Rural Areas at International Conferences
/*chapter*/Deployment of Pioneers and Traveling Teachers
/*chapter*/Comments on Aspects of the Seven Year Plan
/*chapter*/Execution of Three Bahá’ís in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Imminent Obliteration of the Site of the House of the Bab
/*chapter*/Establishment of European Branch Office of Bahá’í International Community
/*chapter*/Bahá’í International Fund-Recent Victories and Immediate Challenges
/*chapter*/Execution of Seven Members of the Spiritual Assembly of Hamadan
/*chapter*/Execution of Three Bahá’ís in Tehran
/*chapter*/Execution of Four Bahá’ís in Iran
/*chapter*/Announcement of Representatives to the International Conferences
/*chapter*/Tests of Bahá’í Community Life-A Balanced Perspective
/*chapter*/Execution of Two Bahá’ís in Kashmir
/*chapter*/Message to First Women's Conference, United Kingdom
/*chapter*/Execution of Auxiliary Board Member and Seven Assembly Members in Tabriz; Abduction of Two Teenage Girls
/*chapter*/A New Phase of Persecution in Iran
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on the Assistance of God
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation of Prayers and Passages from the Bahá’í Writings
/*chapter*/Execution of Six Bahá’ís in Tehran and Daryun
/*chapter*/The Worsening Situation in Yazd
/*chapter*/Further Deterioration of the Situation in Iran
/*chapter*/Voice of America Report on Campaign of Arrests against Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Further Acts of Persecution in Iran
/*chapter*/Grave Developments in Iran
/*chapter*/Call for Pioneers
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Excellence in All Things
/*chapter*/Inauguration of Radio Bahá’í Peru
/*chapter*/Demolition of the House of Bahá’u’lláh in Takur; Seizure of Cemetery in Tehran
/*chapter*/Arrest of Eight Members of the Iranian National Spiritual Assembly
/*chapter*/Execution of Eight Members of the Iranian National Spiritual Assembly
/*chapter*/Proselytizing, Development, and the Covenant
/*chapter*/Iranian Supreme Court's Denial of Execution of Iranian National Spiritual Assembly Members
/*chapter*/Appeal by Bahá’í International Community to Iranian Leaders
/*chapter*/Secret Execution of Six Members of Tehran Assembly and Hostess
/*chapter*/Using A Cry from the Heart to Explain the Tragic Events in Iran
/*chapter*/Plans for Commemorating the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Ascension of Bahiyyih Khanum
/*chapter*/Golden Opportunity Offered by Reign of Relentless Terror; Actions Taken to Defend the Bahá’ís of Iran
/*chapter*/Call for a Day of Prayer for the Bahá’ís of Iran; Inviting Sympathetic Organizations and Individuals
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Family Life
/*chapter*/Mounting Cruelties and the Heightened Steadfastness of the Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Relocation of Manila Conference
/*chapter*/Transfer of Manila Conference to Canberra, Australia
/*chapter*/Representation of the Universal House of Justice at Lagos Conference by Hand of the Cause of God John Robarts
/*chapter*/Further Developments of the Situation in Iran
/*chapter*/Six Martyrdoms, More Arrests Resulting from Fresh Outburst of Persecutions
/*chapter*/Execution of Two Members of the Spiritual Assembly of Urumiyyih
/*chapter*/Appointment of New Counselor in Asia
/*chapter*/Passing of Amoz Gibson, Member of the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Call for Ballots to Elect One Member of the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Execution of Two Members of the Khaniabad Spiritual Assembly
/*chapter*/Message to the International Conference in Dublin, Ireland-2 June 1982
/*chapter*/Comments on the Station of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and the Language Used by the Central Figures
/*chapter*/Martyrdom of Four Bahá’ís in Qazvin and Surrounding Areas
/*chapter*/Election of Glenford Mitchell to the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Guidelines Concerning the Registration of Children and Youth
/*chapter*/Commemoration at the World Center of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Passing of the Greatest Holy Leaf and Inauguration of the Seat of the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Execution of 'Abbas-'Ali Sidiqipur in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Elucidation of the Principle of Confidentiality
/*chapter*/Message to the International Conference in Quito, Ecuador-6-8 August 1982
/*chapter*/Message to the International Conference in Lagos, Nigeria-19-22 August 1982
/*chapter*/Execution of 'Ali' Na'imiyan in Urumiyyih
/*chapter*/Message to the International Conference in Montreal, Canada-3-5 September 1982
/*chapter*/Message to the International Conference in Canberra, Australia-2-5 September 1982
/*chapter*/Comments on the First Danish Bahá’í Women's Conference

/*chapter*/Guidelines for Behavior of Children at Feast
14 October 1982

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Canada

Dear Bahá’í Friends,

1.  The Universal House of Justice has received your letter of 14th September 1982 concerning the role of Local Spiritual Assemblies in guiding parents and children in standards of behaviour for children at community gatherings, such as Nineteen Day Feasts and Bahá’í Holy Day observances.

2.  Further to the letter we wrote on its behalf on 28th June 1977, the House of Justice has instructed us to say that children should be trained to understand the spiritual significance of the gatherings of the followers of the Blessed Beauty, and to appreciate the honour and bounty of being able to take part in them, whatever their outward form may be. It is realized that some Bahá’í observances are lengthy and it is difficult for very small children to remain quiet for so long. In such cases one or other of the parents may have to miss part of the meeting in order to care for the child. The Spiritual Assembly can also perhaps help the parents by providing for a children's observance, suited to their capacities, in a separate room during part of the community's observance. Attendance at the whole of the adult celebration thus becomes a sign of growing maturity and a distinction to be earned by good behaviour.

3.  In any case, the House of Justice points out that parents are responsible for their children and should make them behave when they attend Bahá’í meetings. If children persist in creating a disturbance they should be taken out of the meeting. This is not merely necessary to ensure the properly dignified conduct of Bahá’í meetings but is an aspect of the training of children in courtesy, consideration for others, reverence, and obedience to their parents.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,

DEPARTMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT



/*chapter*/Intensification of Oppression of Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Execution of Dr. Diya'u'llah Ahrari in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Paul Haney
/*chapter*/Imprisonment of More Than Eighty Bahá’ís in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Establishment of First Bahá’í Radio Station in North America
/*chapter*/Torture of Bahá’ís Imprisoned in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Call for Another Day of Prayer
/*chapter*/Execution of Hidayat Siyavushi in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Prayer of `Abdu'l-Bahá for Martyred Friends and Relatives
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on the Importance of Deepening
/*chapter*/Occupation of the Seat of the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Execution of Two Bahá’ís in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Execution of Mrs. Tuba Za'irpur in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Message to Youth Conferences in Costa Rica and Honduras
/*chapter*/Election of the Universal House of Justice-Riḍván 1983
/*chapter*/Execution of Two Bahá’ís in Isfahan
/*chapter*/Further Evolution of the International Teaching Center
/*chapter*/Statement by the President of the United States about the Bahá’ís of Iran
/*chapter*/Execution of Six Bahá’ís in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Execution by Hanging of Ten Bahá’í Women in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Message to Youth-Summons to Vindicate Martyred Youth
/*chapter*/Appointment of Continental Counselors
/*chapter*/Execution of Suhayl Hushmand in Shiraz
/*chapter*/Attacks against Bahá’í Villagers in Mazindaran; Kidnapping of Two Bahá’ís in Tehran
/*chapter*/Message to the European Youth Conference in Innsbruck
/*chapter*/Continuing Harassments and Arrests in Iran
/*chapter*/Formation of Nine New National Spiritual Assemblies at Riḍván
/*chapter*/Intensification of Waves of Arrests in Iran
/*chapter*/Arrest of More Bahá’ís in Iran
/*chapter*/Passing of Sylvia Ioas, Member of the International Bahá’í Council
/*chapter*/Requisites for Spiritual Growth
/*chapter*/Preparations for International Youth Year
/*chapter*/Banning of Bahá’í Administration in Iran
/*chapter*/Open Letter to Iranian Authorities from the National Spiritual Assembly of Iran
/*chapter*/Social and Economic Development New Field of Bahá’í Service
/*chapter*/Passing of Continental Counselor Raul Pavon
/*chapter*/Continued Pressure against the Bahá’ís of Iran
/*chapter*/Appointment of Continental Counselors
/*chapter*/Response of Individuals to Persecution of Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Service in Voluntary Nonsectarian Organizations
/*chapter*/Acute Needs of the International Funds
/*chapter*/Message to Youth-International Youth Year
/*chapter*/Death of Three More Iranian Bahá’ís and Arrest Of 250 More
/*chapter*/Passing of Ethel Revell, Member of the International Bahá’í Council
/*chapter*/Message to National Bahá’í Women's Conference, Kenya
/*chapter*/Persecution of Bahá’ís in Morocco
/*chapter*/Inaugural Broadcast of Radio Bahá’í Bolivia
/*chapter*/Insidious Turn of Persecution of Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Execution of Three by Firing Squad
/*chapter*/Use of Torture to Extract False Confessions from Iranian Bahá’ís
/*chapter*/Summary of the Situation in Iran
/*chapter*/The Development of the Soul and the Reconstruction of Society
/*chapter*/Message to Bahá’í Women's Conference in Cotonou, Benin
/*chapter*/Execution of Nusratu'llah Vahdat in Mashhad
/*chapter*/Execution of Ihsanu'llah Kathiri in Tehran
/*chapter*/Results of Bahá’í Women's Conference in Cotonou, Benin
/*chapter*/Relationship between Husband and Wife-Further Comments
/*chapter*/Dedication of the Mother Temple of the Pacific Islands, Apia, Western Samoa
/*chapter*/Introduction of the Law of Huququ'llah to the West
/*chapter*/Understanding the Laws of the Faith
/*chapter*/Execution of Manuchihr Ruhi
/*chapter*/Roles of Parents within the Bahá’í Family
/*chapter*/Message to Youth Conference, London, Ontario
/*chapter*/Safeguarding the Letters of Shoghi Effendi
/*chapter*/Call for Pioneers
/*chapter*/Martyrdom of Iranian National Spiritual Assembly Member Shapur Markazi; Death of Aminu'llah Qurbanpur in Prison
/*chapter*/The Universal House of Justice's Power of Elucidation
/*chapter*/Execution of Member of Disbanded Iranian National Spiritual Assembly and of Bahá’ís from Karaj and Mashhad
/*chapter*/Passing of the Hand of the Cause of God Shu'a'u'llah 'Ala'i
/*chapter*/Invitation to Participate in the Formulation of the Next Plan
/*chapter*/Execution of Six Bahá’ís in Tehran
/*chapter*/Execution of Dr. Farad Asdaqi after Four Months of Torture; Death of Two Bahá’ís in Tabriz after More Than Two Years' Imprisonment
/*chapter*/Adoption of Another Oppressive Measure by the Iranian Government
/*chapter*/Renewed Call for Support of International Funds
/*chapter*/International Year of Peace
/*chapter*/Execution of Ruhu'llah Hasuri in Yazd; Confirmation of Death of Rustam Varjavandi in Prison
/*chapter*/Elucidation of the Lesser Peace and the Supreme Tribunal
/*chapter*/Passing of Lloyd Gardner, Continental Counselor
/*chapter*/Execution of Ruhu'llah Bahramshahi in Yazd and Nusratu'llah Subhani in Tehran
/*chapter*/Human Suffering and the Reconstruction of Society
/*chapter*/Responsibilities of Youth at the Age of Maturity
/*chapter*/Message to Youth-Scaling the Heights of Excellence
/*chapter*/Announcement of Completion of a Statement on Peace Addressed to the Peoples of the World
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on the Law of Huququ'llah
/*chapter*/Message to International Youth Conference, Columbus, Ohio
/*chapter*/Inauguration of Public Information Office at the World Center
/*chapter*/Election of Delegates to National Conventions
/*chapter*/Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and Bahá’í Peace Activities
/*chapter*/Development of Local and National Bahá’í Funds
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Peace
/*chapter*/Execution of Two More Iranian Bahá’ís; Bahá’í Students Pressured
/*chapter*/The Promise of World Peace
/*chapter*/Appointment of Continental Boards of Counselors
/*chapter*/Reinterment of Bahá’u’lláh's Faithful Half-Brother
/*chapter*/Execution of 'Azizu'llah Ashjari by Firing Squad
/*chapter*/Presentation of Peace Statement to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
/*chapter*/Presentation of Peace Statement to the President of the United States
/*chapter*/Adoption of Resolution in Support of Iranian Bahá’ís by the United Nations General Assembly Affirmation of Emergence from Obscurity
/*chapter*/Message to Conference of Counselors in the Holy Land
/*chapter*/Release of a Compilation on Women
/*chapter*/Report from Conference in the Holy Land; the Inception of the Fourth Epoch of the Formative Age
/*chapter*/Women-Their Role in Society and the Establishment of Peace; Membership on the Universal House of Justice
/*chapter*/Message to National Youth Conference, Adelaide, Australia
/*chapter*/Inaugural Broadcast of Radio Bahá’í Panama


/*chapter*/Epochs of the Formative Age
To all National Spiritual Assemblies

Dear Bahá’í friends,

1.  In the letter dated 2 January 1986 written by the Universal House of Justice to the Bahá’ís of the world, reference was made to the inception of the fourth epoch of the Formative Age. In response to questions subsequently put to the House of Justice about the periods related to the earlier epochs of that Age, the Research Department was requested to prepare a statement on the subject. This has now been presented, and a copy is enclosed.

2.  Kindly share this material of topical interest with the friends, as you deem fit, so that it may be studied in their deepening classes, summer schools, conferences and similar gatherings.

With loving Bahá’í greetings,
DEPARTMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT


The Epochs of the Formative Age
Prepared by the Research Department of the Universal House of Justice
Introduction:

3.  In disclosing the panoramic vision of the unfoldment of the Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh, Shoghi Effendi refers to three major evolutionary stages through which the Faith must pass -- the Apostolic or Heroic Age (1844-1921) associated with the Central Figures of the Faith;[1] the Formative or Transitional Age (1921-),[2] the "hallmark"[3] of which is the rise and establishment of the Administrative Order, based on the execution of the provisions of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Will and Testament;[4] and, the Golden Age which will represent the "consummation of this glorious Dispensation."[3] Close examination of the details of Bahá’í history reveals that the individual Ages are comprised of a number of periods-inseparable parts of one integrated whole.[5]

4.  In relation to the Heroic Age of our Faith, the Guardian, in a letter dated 5 June 1947 to the American Bahá’ís, specified that this Age consisted of three epochs and described the distinguishing features of each:

... the Apostolic and Heroic Age of our Faith, fell into three distinct epochs, of nine, of thirty-nine and of twenty-nine years' duration, associated respectively with the Babi Dispensation and the ministries of Bahá’u’lláh and of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. This primitive Age of the Bahá’í Era, unapproached in spiritual fecundity by any period associated with the mission of the Founder of any previous Dispensation, was impregnated, from its inception to its termination, with the creative energies generated through the advent of two independent Manifestations and the establishment of a Covenant unique in the spiritual annals of mankind.[1]
5.  The Formative Age, in which we now live and serve,[2] was ushered in with the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá.[6] Its major thrust is the shaping, development and consolidation of the local, national and international institutions of the Faith.[7] It is clear from the enumeration of the tasks associated with the Formative Age that their achievement will require increasingly mature levels of functioning of the Bahá’í community:

During this Formative Age of the Faith, and in the course of present and succeeding epochs, the last and crowning stage in the erection of the framework of the Administrative Order of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh -- the election of the Universal House of Justice -- will have been completed, the Kitab-i-Aqdas, the Mother Book of His Revelation, will have been codified and its laws promulgated, the Lesser Peace will have been established, the unity of mankind will have been achieved and its maturity attained, the Plan conceived by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá will have been executed, the emancipation of the Faith from the fetters of religious orthodoxy will have been effected, and its independent religious status will have been universally recognized, ...[8]
6.  The epochs of the Formative Age mark progressive stages in the evolution of the organic Bahá’í community and signal the maturation of its institutions, thus enabling the Faith to operate at new levels and to initiate new functions. The timing of each epoch is designated by the Head of the Faith, and given the organic nature of evolutionary development, the transition from one epoch to another may not be abrupt, but may well occur over a period of time. This is the case, for example, in relation to both the inception of the Formative Age and the end of its first epoch. In relation to the former, the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá is the transitional event most often identified with the close of the Heroic Age and the beginning of the Formative Age.[9] However, the Guardian also asserts that the Apostolic Age of the Faith concluded "more particularly with the passing [in 1932] of His well-beloved and illustrious sister, the Most Exalted Leaf -- the last survivor of a glorious and heroic age."[2] With regard to the termination of the first epoch of the Formative Age, Shoghi Effendi has placed this between the years 1944[4] and 1946.[10]

7.  Before describing the individual epochs of the Formative Age, it is important to comment on the use of the term "epoch" in the writings of the Guardian. In a letter date 18 January 1953, written on his behalf to a National Spiritual Assembly, it is explained that the term is used to apply both to the stages in the Formative Age of the Faith, and to the phases in the unfoldment of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Divine Plan.[11] We are currently in the fourth-epoch of the Formative Age[12] and the second epoch of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Divine Plan.[13] (The first epoch of the Divine Plan began in 1937, with the inception of the First Seven Year Plan of the North American Bahá’í community, and concluded with the successful completion of the Ten Year Crusade in 1963.[11] The second epoch of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Divine Plan commenced in 1964 with the inauguration of the Nine Year Plan of the Universal House of Justice.)

8.  The primary focus of this statement is on the epochs of the Formative Age of the Dispensation of Bahá’u’lláh.


The First Epoch of the Formative Age: 1921-1944/46

9.  The first epoch of this Age witnessed the "birth and the primary stages in the erection of the framework of the Administrative Order of the Faith."[4] The epoch was characterized by concentration on the formation of local and national institutions in all five continents,[14] thereby initiating the erection of the machinery necessary for future systematic teaching activities. This epoch was further marked by the launching, at the instigation of the Guardian, of the First Seven Year Plan (1937-1944) by the American Bahá’í community. This Plan, drawing its inspiration from the Tablets of the Divine Plan, represented the first systematic teaching campaign of the Bahá’í community and inaugurated the initial stage of the execution of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Divine Plan in the Western Hemisphere.[4]


The Second Epoch of the Formative Age: 1946-1963

10.  This epoch extended the developments of the first epoch by calling for the consummation of a laboriously constructed Administrative Order,"[8] and was to witness the formulation of a succession of teaching plans designed to facilitate the development of the Faith beyond the confines of the Western Hemisphere and the continent of Europe.[8] This epoch was distinguished, in the first instance, by the simultaneous and often spontaneous prosecution of Bahá’í national plans in both the East and the West.[15] For example, in a letter written at Naw-Ruz 105 [1949] to the Bahá’ís in the East, the beloved Guardian listed the specific plans undertaken by the United States, British, Indian, Persian, Australian and New Zealand, and 'Iraqi National Spiritual Assemblies, and indicated that this concerted action signalized the transition into the second epoch of the Formative Age.[16] The internal consolidation and the administrative experience gained by the National Assemblies was utilized and mobilized by the Guardian with the launching of the Ten Year World Crusade[17] -- a crusade involving the simultaneous prosecution of twelve national plans. The plans derived their direction from ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's Divine Plan, and the goals were assigned by Shoghi Effendi from the World Centre of the Faith.[18] A second distinguishing feature of this epoch was the "RISE" and "STEADY CONSOLIDATION"[15] of the World Centre of the Faith.

11.  The second epoch thus clearly demonstrated the further maturation of the institutions of the Administrative Order. It witnessed the appointment of the Hands of the Cause,[19] the introduction of Auxiliary Boards,[20] and the establishment of the International Bahá’í Council.[21] The culminating event of the epoch was the election of the Universal House of Justice in 1963. It further demonstrated the more effective and co-ordinated use of the administrative machinery to prosecute the goals of the first global spiritual crusade, and the emergence in ever sharper relief of the World Centre of the Faith.


The Third Epoch of the Formative Age: 1963-1986

12.  In addressing the British National Spiritual Assembly in 1951, the Guardian foreshadowed "world-wide enterprises destined to be embarked upon, in future epochs of that same [Formative] Age, by the Universal House of Justice."[22] In announcing the Nine Year Plan, "the second of those world-encircling enterprises destined in the course of time to carry the Word of God to every human Soul,"[23] the Universal House of Justice embarked upon the process anticipated by the Guardian and proclaimed the commencement of the third epoch of the Formative Age, an epoch which called the Bahá’ís to a yet more mature level of administrative functioning, consistent with the expected vast increase in the size and diversity of the community, its emergence as a model to mankind, and the extension of the influence of the Faith in the world at large. The House of Justice, in a letter dated October 1963, stated:

Beloved friends, the Cause of God, guarded and nurtured since its inception by God's Messengers, by the Centre of His Covenant and by His Sign on earth, now enters a new epoch, the third of the Formative Age.[24] It must now grow rapidly in size, increase its spiritual cohesion and executive ability, develop its institutions and extend its influence into all strata of society. We, its members, must, by constant study of the life-giving Word, and by dedicated service, deepen in spiritual understanding and show to the world a mature, responsible, fundamentally assured and happy way of life, far removed from the passions, prejudices and distractions of present day society.[23]
13.  The period of the third epoch encompassed three world plans, involving all National Spiritual Assemblies, under the direction of the Universal House of Justice, namely, the Nine Year Plan (1964-1973), the Five Year Plan (1974-1979), and the Seven Year Plan (1979-1986). This third epoch witnessed the emergence of the Faith from obscurity[25] and the initiation of activities designed to foster the social and economic development of communities.[26] The institution of the Continental Boards of Counsellors was brought into existence[27] leading to the establishment of the International Teaching Centre.[28] Assistants to the Auxiliary Boards were also introduced.[29] At the World Centre of the Faith, the historic construction and occupation of the Seat of the Universal House of Justice was a crowning event.[30]


The Fourth Epoch of the Formative Age: 1986-2000[31]

14.  In a letter dated 2 January 1986 written by the Universal House of Justice to the Bahá’ís of the World, the Supreme Body announced the inception of the fourth epoch of the Formative Age. It highlighted the significant developments that had taken place in the "organic growth of the Cause of God"[12] during the course of the recently completed third epoch, by assessing the readiness of the Bahá’í community to begin to address the objectives of the new Six Year Plan scheduled to begin on 21 April 1986, and, outlined the general aims and characteristics of this new Plan. Whereas national plans had previously derived largely from the World Centre, in this new epoch the specific goals for each national community will be formulated, within the framework of the overall objectives of the Plan, by means of consultation between the particular National Spiritual Assembly and the Continental Board of Counsellors. As the Universal House of Justice states:

This new process ... signalizes the inauguration of a new stage in the unfoldment of the Administrative Order. Our beloved Guardian anticipated a succession of epochs during the Formative Age of the Faith; we have no hesitation in recognizing that this new development in the maturation of Bahá’í institutions marks the inception of the fourth epoch of that Age.[12]

Future epochs

15. The tasks that remain to be accomplished during the course of the Formative Age are many and challenging. Additional epochs can be anticipated, each marking significant stages in the evolution of the Administrative Order and culminating in the Golden Age of the Faith.[8] The Golden Age, itself, will involve "successive epochs"[32] leading ultimately to the establishment of the Most Great Peace, to the World Bahá’í Commonwealth and to the "birth and efflorescence of a world civilization."[8]



/*chapter*/Plans for the Dedication of the Mother Temple of the Indian Subcontinent, New Delhi
24 FEBRUARY 1986 To all National Spiritual Assemblies 452.1 

JOYFULLY ANNOUNCE DEDICATION MOTHER TEMPLE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT WILL BE HELD NEW DELHI 23-27 DECEMBER 1986. AMATU'L-BAHA RUHIYYIH KHANUM WILL REPRESENT UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE THIS HISTORIC OCCASION AND DEDICATE TEMPLE. TEMPLE DEDICATION COMMITTEE FORMED UNDER AEGIS NATIONAL ASSEMBLY INDIA WILL CONVEY NECESSARY INFORMATION. UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE 451-46. See message no. 447. 451-47. CF, p. 6. Letter dated 5 June 1947 to the American Bahá'ís. 451-48. MBW, P. 155. Letter dated 4 May 1953. 451-49. CF, p. 6. Letter dated 5 June 1947 to the American Bahá'ís. 



/*chapter*/The Six Year Plan-Major Objectives and Setting National Goals
25 FEBRUARY 1986 

To all National Spiritual Assemblies 

Dear Bahá'í Friends, 

The Six Year Plan On 2 January 1986, on the closing day of the Counselors' Conference, the 

453.1 Universal House of Justice announced certain features of the Six Year Plan and the methods by which they national goals were to be worked out in consultation between the Counselors and National Spiritual Assemblies., Before Ridvan you will receive a message from the Universal House of Justice to the entire Bahá'í world and also one addressed specifically to the Bahá'ís within the jurisdiction of each National Spiritual Assembly.2 In the meantime the House of Justice wishes you to begin your consultations on the goals of the Six Year Plan for your country. The preliminary steps in goal-setting have already been taken, namely the assessment of each country's strengths and weaknesses which the National Spiritual Assemblies recently made at the request of the Universal House of Justice, and which will undoubtedly be of great assistance to each one of you as you enter the next stage of the process.3 The House of Justice has instructed us to send you the following additional guidelines together with the enclosed statement of the major objectives of the plan at the national level, which includes some suggestions for specific goals to provide a basis for your consultations. You should not, however, confine yourselves to those suggestions. 

453.4 A special characteristic of the Six Year Plan is that the conceiving of the detailed national goals is itself to be one of the tasks of the Plan, but this fact should not hold up in any way the activities of your communities. With this letter you are being acquainted with the major objectives of the plan, and every believer, every Local Spiritual Assembly, and all the national committees can pursue immediately, with increasing vigor, many 

projects towards their attainment, both projects already in process and others which will be newly conceived, so that when the specific national goals for each community are announced they will be received by a united company of devoted followers of Bahá'u'lláh already in the full flood of activity. 453-1. See message no. 447. 453-2. See message no. 456. 453-3. See message no. 415, "Invitation to Participate in the Formulation of the Next Plan" (25 November 1984). 

453.5 It is the hope of the Universal House of Justice that each National Assembly will be able to meet before Ridvan with a representative of the Continental Board of Counselors so that from this initial consultation a basis will be laid for consultation on the goals at the National Conventions. 

453.6 Other consultations will no doubt continue following the Ridvan Festival. Their duration will depend on the condition of each national community its size and the complexity of its circumstances. As soon as specific goals have been formulated and agreed, they should be immediately sent to the World Center. They will then be considered by the Universal House of justice and the International Teaching Center, and, as soon as possible, the National Assembly will be informed of the approval or modification of its proposal. Each submission will be considered on its arrival; the earlier they arrive the better, and in no case 

should a submission reach the World Center later than I November 1986. 

453.7 Among the elements of the plan which are not covered by the list of major objectives are the goals for international assistance including pioneering, resident teaching projects, traveling teaching, assistance for development projects, and for the acquisition of properties and vehicles. Notes relating to these 

elements have been provided to the Continental Boards of Counselors, who will share them with National Assemblies during the process of consultation. Since they are international in nature, these goals will have to be consolidated and approved at the World Center before being generally announced. 

453.8 Though the institutions of the Faith are responsible for planning the goals and activities of the Cause, for stimulating and encouraging the believers to arise, and for supporting and unifying them in their services, it is, in the final analysis, through the spiritual decisions and actions of the individual believers that the Faith moves forward on its course to ultimate victory. It is the ardent hope of the Universal House of Justice that every faithful follower of Bahá'u'lláh will search his or her heart and turn with full attention and loving self-sacrifice to the consideration of the goals of the Six Year Plan, and determine how to play a part in their achievement. 

453.9 The prayers of the Universal House of Justice and the International Teaching Center at the Sacred Threshold will surround the institutions of the Faith in every continent and nation as you assume your weighty task of conceiving the goals which will guide the national communities of the Faith through the next six years. 

With loving Bahá'í greetings, 

DEPARTMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT 


The Six Year Plan 143-149 . 1986-1992 The Major Objectives The major objectives of the Six Year Plan include: carrying the healing 

453.10 Message of Bahá'u'lláh to the generality of mankind; greater involvement of the Faith in the life of human society; a worldwide increase in the translation, production, distribution and use of Bahá'í literature; further acceleration in the process of the maturation of national and local Bahá'í communities; greater attention to universal participation and the spiritual enrichment of individual believers; a wider extension of Bahá'í education to children and youth and the strengthening of Bahá'í family life; and the pursuit of projects of social and economic development in well-established Bahá'í communities. Set out below are suggestions for possible ways of achieving the above 453.11 objectives to act as a basis for consultation and a stimulus for thinking. National Assemblies should not confine themselves to these points if they feel that there are other matters which deserve attention. 1. 

453.12 Carrying the healing Message of Bahá'u'lláh to the generality of mankind

- Increase the number of believers from all strata of society, identifying as goals of the plan those specific sectors, minority groups, tribal peoples, etc. which are at present underrepresented in the Bahá'í community and which will, therefore, be given special attention during the plan. - Increase the number of localities where Bahá'ís reside, opening, in the process, virgin states, provinces, islands or other major civil subdivisions of the country. - Seize teaching opportunities by planning projects in areas where receptivity is found, aiming at large-scale enrollment and entry by troops where possible. - Be alert to opportunities for international collaboration with other Bahá'í communities in the promotion of the Faith through: border teaching projects; the sending of traveling teachers; and the teaching of special groups such as those temporarily abroad for study or work, particularly those from countries which are difficult of access, such as China or countries in Eastern Europe. - Raise up homefront pioneers and traveling or resident teachers to assist in the fulfillment of teaching goals and plans. 

Utilize mass media systems for greater proclamation. Make use of drama and singing in the teaching and deepening work and in Bahá'í gatherings, where advisable. 453.13 2. Greater involvement of the Faith in the life of human society Develop the proper understanding and practice of consultation among members of the Bahá'í community and in the work of Bahá'í institutions, and foster the spirit of consultation in the conduct of human affairs and the resolution of conflicts at all levels of society. Foster association with organizations, prominent persons and those in authority concerning the promotion of peace, world order and allied objectives, with a view to offering the Bahá'í teachings and insights regarding current problems and thought. Train suitable Bahá'ís to undertake public relations activities. Foster appreciation of the Faith in scholarly and academic circles by developing Bahá'í scholars hip, by endeavoring to have the Faith included in the curricula and textbooks of schools and universities, and by other means. Encourage Bahá'í youth to move towards the front ranks of those professions, trades, arts and crafts necessary to human progress. Promote the establishment of Bahá'í clubs in universities and other similar educational institutions. Foster the practice of the equality of the sexes both in the life of the Bahá'í community and in society as a whole and, for this purpose, hold special conferences and training programs for women and for men. 453.14 3. A worldwide increase in the translation, production, distribution and use of Bahá'í literature Foster the use of Bahá'í literature, especially in local languages, supplemented as need be by tape recordings and visual aids. Improve the distribution of Bahá'í literature by taking specific steps, such as the establishment of regional depots where necessary, and the education of Local 

Spiritual Assemblies in the responsibilities to acquaint the friends with Bahá'í literature and ensure its easy availability. Produce greater supplies of Bahá'í literature in accordance with well-thought-out plans of translation, production and distribution. Produce, where required for translations into vernacular languages, simplified versions of the Sacred Scriptures, the writings of the Guardian and the statements of the Universal House of Justice. Establish Bahá'í lending libraries.  

453.15 Further acceleration in the process of the maturation of local and national Bahá'í communities Adopt specific programs to assist and encourage the development of isolated centers into groups, and groups into communities with Local Spiritual Assemblies, resulting in a steady increase of such Assemblies. Adopt specific goals and programs to consolidate and strengthen Local Spiritual Assemblies, so that they will: - Hold regular meetings with harmonious and productive consultation, 435.15a - Properly organize and conduct the work of their secretariat and treasury, - Appoint and coordinate the work of local committees for special aspects of their work, such as teaching, child education, youth activities, literature distribution, etc., - Win the respect and confidence of their local communities so that the believers will turn to them for the resolution of problems and advice in their services to the Cause, - Where appropriate, acquire and develop the use of local centers, - Obtain incorporation or equivalent recognition as a legal entity, - Exercise their responsibilities in relation to marriages, births, transfers of membership, marriages and deaths. - Maintain registers of declarations, births, transfers of membership, marriages and deaths. Adopt specific goals and programs to consolidate communities with Local Spiritual Assemblies so that the believers will be encouraged to: - Attend regularly Nineteen Day Feasts and the observances of Bahá'í 

453.15b Holy Days, and enhance the spiritual quality of such gatherings, - Pursue local teaching and deepening activities, - Foster the realization of the equality of then and women, - Develop local activities for children and youth, - Support the fund, - Carry out extension teaching projects. Develop the functioning of National Spiritual Assemblies, adopting specific plans and programs to: - Improve their standard of united, productive, loving consultation, - Develop efficiently functioning national secretariats, - Enhance the standard of the functioning of national treasuries and promote the goal of financial independence of the national Bahá'í community, A -point strong national committees to carry out, under the general supervision of the National Spiritual Assembly, the many specialized aspects of the work of the Cause, including the detailed planning and prompt execution of the work necessary to achieve all the goals of the Six Year Plan. - Acquire, where needed and feasible, national and local properties, such as Haziratu'l-Quds, teaching institutes, summer schools, Bahá'í cemeteries, etc. and ensure their proper care and maintenance. - Obtain, where legally possible, official recognition for Bahá'í marriage and holy days and exemption from the payment of taxes on Bahá'í institutions and their activities. Ensure the rapid and regular dissemination of news to all believers. Hold regular, well-planned and well-run summer and winter schools and conferences at costs and in localities which will permit the largest attendance. Encourage collaboration between or amongst Local Spiritual Assemblies in mutually agreed projects. Develop and administer correspondence courses for teaching and deepening. 453.16 5. Greater attention to universal participation and the spiritual enrichment of individual believers * Promote universal participation in the life of the Faith and an increased sense of their Bahá'í identity among children, youth and adults. - Encourage, where feasible, the practice of dawn prayer. * Encourage individual believers to adopt teaching goals for themselves. - Carry out activities designed to deepen the believers in both a spiritual and intellectual understanding of the Cause. a Encourage believers to make greater use of Bahá'í' literature. - Encourage the believers to enhance their command of language to assist them to understand the Bahá'í writings ever more clearly. a Develop and foster Bahá'í scholarship and lend support to the Associations for Bahá'í Studies. - Foster obedience to the Bahá'í laws of personal behavior such as abstention from the drinking of alcoholic beverages and from the taking of habit-forming drugs, and inspire the believers to follow the Bahá'í way of life.453.17 6. A wider extension of Bahá'í education to children and youth, and the strengthening of Bahá'í family life Encourage the holding of regular classes for the Bahá'í education of children. Develop systematic lesson plans and other materials for the Bahá'í education of children. - Train believers to teach Bahá'í children's classes. - Establish a program for the guidance of parents, especially mothers, in the care and training of Bahá'í children. - Sponsor institutes on Bahá'í marriage and family life. - Encourage community activities involving Bahá'í families. 7. 

453.18 The pursuit of projects of social and economic development in well-established Bahá'í communities - Encourage Local Spiritual Assemblies and the rank and file of the believers to consider ways in which they can advance the social and economic development of their communities. - Establish tutorial schoolS4 and preschools where needed and feasible. - Encourage and sponsor adult literacy programs where needed, especially for women. - Foster collaboration with other agencies involved in social and economic development in areas where the Bahá'í communities can contribute to the work.



/*chapter*/Passing of Angus Cowan, Continental Counselor
12 MARCH 1986 

The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá'ís of Canada HEARTS GRIEF-STRICKEN PASSING OUTSTANDING PROMOTER CAUSE ANGUS COWAN.' 

454.1 HIS SERVICES AS PREEMINENT BAHA'I TEACHER OF INDIAN PEOPLES, HIS UNCEASING LABORS THROUGHOUT LONG YEARS DEVOTION RANGED FROM LOCAL AND NATIONAL SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLIES TO AUXILIARY BOARD AND BOARD COUNSELORS. HIS COMPASSION, COURTESY, HUMILITY MAGNANIMITY UNFORGETTABLE. BAHA'I COMMUNITY CANADA ROBBED OF A DEDICATED NOBLE WORKER WHO BORE HIS SUFFERINGS TO THE VERY END WITH EXEMPLARY FORTITUDE. CONVEY LOVING CONDOLENCES HIS BELOVED WIFE AND FAMILY AND ASSURANCES ARDENT PRAYERS HIS RADIANT SOUES PROGRESS THROUGHOUT WORLDS GOD. UNIVERSAL HOUSE OF JUSTICE 453-4. A BAD tutorial school is a simple school, usually in a rural area where no formal education is available. It often consists of one teacher and a group of students who learn Bahá'í moral and ethical teachings and basic reading, writing, and computation skills. 454-1. For an account of the life and services of Angus Cowan, see BW 19:703-06. 



/*chapter*/Women - Reasons for Exemption from Acts of Worship
17 MARCH 1986 

To an individual Bahá'í 

Dear Bahá'í Friend, 

455.1 The Universal House of Justice has received your letter Of 4 March 1986 seeking clarification of a statement concerning certain obligations of women found in the Kitab-i-Aqdas. We are directed to convey the following. 

455.2 There is nothing in the teachings of the Faith to state that women in their courses are exempt from fasting and from offering the obligatory prayers because they are unclean. 

455.3 The concept of uncleanness as understood and practiced in the religious communities of the past has been abolished by Bahá'u'lláh. As you are aware, He says that through His revelation "all created things were immersed in the sea of purification" (God Passes By, page 154). 

This should, of course, be understood in the context of His clear instructions about the necessity for all to exemplify immaculate cleanliness, especially when engaged in acts of worship. 

455.4 We are to confirm that you are quite right in pointing out that the term used in this regard in the Synopsis and Codification of the Laws and Ordinances of the Kitab-i-Aqdas [P. 36, (4) (c)] is "exemption," not prohibition. 

With loving Bahá'í greetings, 

DEPARTMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT 




/*chapter*/Notes
[1] See FSTS, pp. 33-38.
[2] The statement was presented by Mr. David Hofman, a member of the Universal House of Justice, to the Bahá’ís assembled in Royal Albert Hall, London, 28 April-2 May 1963, at the Bahá’í World Congress, which commemorated the Most Great Jubilee, the one hundredth anniversary of Bahá’u’lláh's declaration of His mission, and also marked the victorious completion of the Ten Year Crusade launched by Shoghi Effendi in April 1953.
[3] Bahá’u’lláh, in Bahá’í Prayers, 1991, U.S. ed. p. 120.
[4] ‘Abdu’l-Bahá explained that Daniel's prophecy ("Blessed is he who cometh unto the thousand three hundred and thirty five days," Dan. 12:12) points to one century after Bahá’u’lláh's appearance and the declaration of His mission in 1863 and refers to the spread of the teachings of the Bahá’í Faith across the world. The first epoch of the Divine Plan, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's program of action for the worldwide propagation of the Faith, began in 1937 and ended in 1963, with the conclusion of the Ten Year Crusade (1953-63). "Blessed Beauty" refers to Bahá’u’lláh.
[5] The Heroic Age, the first of three Ages of the Bahá’í Dispensation, began in 1844 with the Declaration of the Báb, ended in 1921 with the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, and spanned the ministries of the Báb, Bahá’u’lláh, and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. It was followed by the Formative Age, which in turn will be followed by the Golden Age.
[6] Tablets of Bahá’u’lláh Revealed after the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, p. 83.
[7] The happenings referred to were the First International Bahá’í Convention held 21-23 April 1963 at the Bahá’í World Center, during which the Universal House of Justice was first elected, and the first Bahá’í World Congress, held in London 28 April through 2 May 1963. Immediately following the World Congress the Universal House of Justice met for several days in the council room of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the British Isles at 27 Rutland Gate, dealing with essential matters concerning its establishment and initial functioning. At the same time, the Hands of the Cause of God were meeting in conclave in another room of the same Ḥaẓíratu’l-Quds, preparing a first draft of the next teaching plan for submission to the Universal House of Justice and arranging the future disposition of their own work. For the message issued by the Hands of the Cause of God announcing the results of the election of the Universal House of Justice, see the epigraph.
[8] Bahá’u’lláh wrote, in Tablets of Bahá’u’lláh (pp. 27, 68): "Inasmuch as for each day there is a new problem and for every problem an expedient solution, such affairs should be referred to the Ministers of the House of Justice that they may act according to the needs and requirements of the time. ... It is incumbent upon all to be obedient unto them." "It is incumbent upon the Trustees of the House of Justice to take counsel together regarding those things which have not outwardly been revealed in the Book, and to enforce that which is agreeable to them. God will verily inspire them with whatsoever He willeth, and He, verily, is the Provider, the Omniscient." ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, in His Will and Testament (p. 19), wrote: "Unto the Most Holy Book every one must turn, and all that is not expressly recorded therein must be referred to the Universal House of Justice." The election of the Universal House of Justice was held in the House of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá in Haifa, 7 Haparsim Street, at the foot of Mount Carmel, on 21 April 1963. The results of the election were announced to the delegates the following day, and the Hands of the Cause of God announced the results in a cable to the Bahá’í world (see epigraph)
[9] Haifa and ‘Akká.
[10] Ḥaram-i-Aqdas (the Most Holy Court) is a designation Shoghi Effendi gave to the northwestern quadrant of the garden surrounding the Shrine of Bahá’u’lláh in Bahjí.
[11] For information on the epochs of the Divine Plan, see message no. 451.
[12] The Mother Temple of Europe is the Bahá’í House of Worship in Langenhain, near Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Its cornerstone was laid on 20 November 1960; construction was completed in the spring of 1963. It was dedicated in July 1964 (see message no. 17).
[13] The Nine Year Plan, 1964-73.
[14] For more details on the development of the relationship between the Bahá’í community and the United Nations, see messages nos 49, 78, 263, 283.
[15] The International Bahá’í Council, a body first appointed by Shoghi Effendi in 1951 and elected in 1961 after his passing by members of National Spiritual Assemblies, ceased to exist upon the election of the Universal House of Justice in 1963. The Universal House of Justice made 10 Haparsim Street its seat until 1 February 1983; the building now houses the International Teaching Center.
[16] In April 1969, during the Nine Year Plan, the Universal House of Justice took a new action, opening the door of pilgrimage to a greater number of believers and instructing the National Spiritual Assemblies in procedures to be followed. See the Riḍván 126 (1969) message, no. 68.
[17] The temple was located in Turkmenistan, near the Iranian border, north of the Iranian province of Khurasan.
[18] God Passes By, p. 300. The first Bahá’í century ended in 1944.
[19] The Most Holy Book is the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, Bahá’u’lláh's book of laws.
[20] The Chosen Branch is Shoghi Effendi, Bahá’u’lláh's great-grandson.
[21] ‘Abdu’l-Bahá included in His Will and Testament a provision for the appointment of Hands of the Cause of God (see WT, pp. 12-13).
[22] See 6 October 1963 letter.
[23] Bahá’í Administration, pp. 39, 4L
[24] Will and Testament of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, P. 14.
[25] Quoted in World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 109.
[26] To maintain the unity and incorruptibility of the Faith, the Covenant of Bahá’u’lláh established a Center of authority to which all are to turn. This Center has been, successively, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Who is uniquely the Center of the Covenant; Shoghi Effendi, the Guardian of the Faith; and the Universal House of Justice, which is the apex of its Administrative Order. A Bahá’í who turns against and defies this Center breaks the Covenant and, if he is adamant in his disobedience, is expelled from the Faith as a Covenant-breaker.
[27] For details on Bahá’u’lláh's proclamation to the kings and rulers of the world and a description of the events held throughout the Bahá’í world to commemorate its anniversary, see letters dated Riḍván 1965, 17 March 1967, and October 1967 (messages no. 24, 41, and 46). For the Tablets Bahá’u’lláh sent to the kings and rulers of the world, see Proclamation of Bahá’u’lláh.
[28] For information on the Formative Age, see entries on Ages and Epochs in the glossary.
[29] In April 1962 fourteen Moroccan Bahá’í men were arrested in Nador. On 31 October 1962, after more than six months of imprisonment, they were tried before the Criminal Court of Nador on charges of rebellion and disorder, attacks on public security, constitution of an association of criminals, and attacks on religious faith. On 10 December 1962 they were found guilty and sentenced. Their cases were then appealed to the Supreme Court of Morocco, which overruled the lower court's verdict and released the men. A worldwide campaign to publicize the plight of the Bahá’í prisoners focused public opinion, favorable to the Bahá’ís, on the Moroccan authorities. For further information, see The Bahá’í World Vol XIII pg 288-89, and messages no. 8 and 12.
[30] Hands of the Cause of God to whom continental responsibilities are assigned as distinct from those whose responsibility it is to serve in the Holy Land.
[31] After Shoghi Effendi's passing in 1957, the functions of preserving the unity of the Bahá’í community, guiding it to the victorious conclusion of the Ten Year Crusade, and calling the election of the Universal House of Justice fell to the Hands of the Cause of God in their capacity as "the Chief Stewards of Bahá’u’lláh's embryonic World Commonwealth" (MBW, p. 127). In order to carry out these vital functions, the Hands of the Cause of God met periodically in conclaves at the World Center to confer on the affairs of the Cause. After the Most Great Jubilee, the one hundredth anniversary of Bahá’u’lláh's declaration of His mission, the Hands of the Cause of God met in London to discuss a number of matters, among those being the evolving role of the members of the Auxiliary Board in light of the increasing maturity of the Bahá’í Administrative Order, as evidenced by the formation of the Universal House of Justice at Riḍván 1963 and the existence of fifty-six National Spiritual Assemblies. The Hands of the Cause of God submitted their views to the Universal House of Justice, which made the decisions enumerated in this letter.
[32] See message dated 17 October 1963 (no. 7) requesting prayers world-wide at the Feast of Qawl (Speech), 23 November.
[33] The nascent administrative institutions referred to are the Local and National Spiritual Assemblies. Bahá’u’lláh ordained the institution of the Local Spiritual Assembly in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas (KA ¶30, n. 49.); ‘Abdu’l-Bahá established the institution of the National Spiritual Assembly (see WT, pp. 14-15). The design conceived by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá is embodied in His Will and Testament, the Charter of the New World Order.
[34] MBW, p. 155. The Bahá’í teachings assert that Adam was a Prophet of God and that He inaugurated the Adamic, or prophetic, cycle that ended with the advent of the Báb and that is followed by the cycle of fulfillment Bahá’u’lláh inaugurated. Shoghi Effendi explains that "The Faith of Bahá’u’lláh should indeed be regarded, if we wish to be faithful to the tremendous implications of its message, as the culmination of a cycle, the final stage in a series of successive, of preliminary and progressive revelations. These, beginning with Adam and ending with the Báb, have paved the way and anticipated with an ever-increasing emphasis the advent of that Day of Days in which He Who is the Promise of All Ages should be made manifest" (WOB, p. 103). For a full description of the ten-part, divinely propelled process and for a discussion of the nature of cycles, see entries on Ten-Part Process and Cycles in the glossary.
[35] WT, p. 10.
[36] MBW, 153, 155.
[37] Tablet to the Kings, referred to by Shoghi Effendi as "the most momentous Tablet revealed by Bahá’u’lláh" (GPB, p. 171). For passages of the Súriy-i-Mulúk that have been translated into English, see PB, pp. 7-12, 47-54, and 102-03. For details on the celebration of the centenary, see messages dated October 1963, Riḍván 1965, 17 March 1967, and October 1967 (nos. 6, 24, 41, and 46)
[38] The Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs of Asia was to be located in Tehran, Iran. Antagonism toward the Bahá'í Faith caused the plans for its construction to be held in abeyance. The Mashriqu’l-Adhkárs of Latin America is in Panama and was dedicated in 1972.
[39] BA, p. 66.
[40] Shoghi Effendi, MBW, p. 59.
[41] Bahá’u’lláh was exiled from Constantinople (now Istanbul) to Adrianople (now Edirne, Turkey), where He remained from 12 December 1863 through 12 August 1868. Edirne lies West of the Bosphorus, near Turkeys border with Greece.
[42] MBW, p. 161.
[43] GWB, pp. 96, 105-06.
[44] MA, p. 11.
[45] BA, p. 66.
[46] ESW, p. 62.
[47] ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, in BP, p. 103.
[48] BA, p. 66.
[49] See messages dated October 1963 (no. 6) and 19 November 1963 (no. 10). See also the message dated November 1964 that follows.
[50] The Súriy-i-Mulúk is Bahá’u’lláh's Tablet to the Kings, portions of which are published in Proclamation of Bahá’u’lláh, pp. 7-12, 47-54, and 102-03.
[51] See message no. 20.
[52] The Universal House of Justice later assumed responsibility for appointing the members of Continental Pioneer Committees and transferred responsibility for directing their work to the International Teaching Center (see message dated 19 May 1983, no. 361). For other letters on the evolving duties of Continental Pioneer Committees, see messages dated Riḍván 1965, 18 March 1966, Riḍván 1966, and 22 July 1974 (nos. 24, 31, 34, and 148).
[53] The International Bahá’í Council, first appointed by Shoghi Effendi in 1951 and, after his passing, elected in 1961 by members of National Spiritual Assemblies, was a precursor of the Universal House of Justice. It ceased to exist upon the election of the Universal House of Justice in 1963.
[54] MBW, p. 127.
[55] UD, p. 261.
[56] Charles Mason Remey, a prominent early American believer who was much loved by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, travelled widely in service to the Faith. In January 1951 he was appointed by Shoghi Effendi to be President of the International Bahá’í Council and, the following year, was appointed a Hand of the Cause of God to serve in the Holy Land. After the passing of Shoghi Effendi on 4 November 1957, Charles Mason Remey served as one of the nine Custodian Hands designated by the body of the Hands of the Cause to administer the Faith from Haifa. In April 1960 he proclaimed himself to be the Second Guardian of the Cause (see BW 13:353 n). This attempt to usurp the Guardianship resulted in his expulsion from the Faith as a Covenant-breaker. For the announcement of his passing, see the message dated 5 April 1974 (no. 144).
[57] WT, p. 20; WOB, p. 17.
[58] WOB, p. 153.
[59] WT, p. 14. See also CUHJ, p. 12.
[60] For an account of the life and services of Leroy Ioas, see BW 14:291-300. For an explanation of the International Bahá’í Council, see the Glossary.
[61] In 1973, the last year of the Nine Year Plan, the Universal House of Justice published A Synopsis and Codification of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas. The volume includes all of the extracts in the list of references that follows. The Bahá’í World Center published a copiously annotated English translation of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas and related texts in 1992.
[62] This message of Shoghi Effendi was later published in CF, pp. 4-38; the passage from the Kitáb-i-Aqdas appears on pp. 18-19 (see also PB, p. 63).
[63] CF, p. 15.
[64] LFG, p. 76.
[65] See message no. 22.
[66] The Tablets of the Divine Plan are fourteen Tablets of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá revealed in 1916 and 1917 to the Bahá’ís of the United Sates and Canada. In them He conveys His mandate for the transmission of the Faith of Bahá’u’lláh throughout the world.
[67] For an account of the life and services of Jessie Revell, see BW 14:300-03. For an explanation of the International Bahá’í Council, see the Glossary.
[68] Passages from a letter written by the Universal House of Justice on 27 May 1966 in response to questions asked by an individual believer on the relationship between the Guardianship and the Universal House of Justice.
[69] WOB, p. 7.
[70] Aghṣán (Branches) are the sons and male descendants of Bahá’u’lláh. In His Will and Testament ‘Abdu’l-Bahá wrote, 'should the firstborn of the Guardian of the Cause of God not manifest in himself the truth of the words: 'The child is the secret essence of its sire,' that is, should he not inherit of the spiritual within him (the Guardian of the Cause of God) and his glorious lineage not be matched with a goodly character, then must he (the Guardian of the Cause of God) choose another branch [Aghṣán] to succeed him" (WT, p. 12).
[71] WOB, p. 150.
[72] WOB, p. 148.
[73] WOB, p. 148, 150.
[74] Rahíq-i-Makhtúm 1:302-04; BN, no. 426 (September 1966): 2.
[75] WOB, p. 148.
[76] WOB, p. 24.
[77] Written by the Guardian's secretary on his behalf to an individual believer, on 25 August 1926.
[78] WT, pp. 19-20, 26.
[79] WOB, p. 89.
[80] GPB, p. 332; WOB, p. 7.
[81] GPB, pp. 213-14.
[82] WOB, p. 153.
[83] See CC I:512. For information on Ḥuqúqu’lláh, see the Glossary.
[84] WT, p. 14. See also CUHJ, p. 12.
[85] GPB, p. 188. See also MA, p. 34.
[86] At the time of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's passing in 1921, Shoghi Effendi was twenty-four years old.
[87] ADJ, p. 22.
[88] For Shoghi Effendi's description of the vast and "majestic" ten-part process that began at the dawn of the Adamic Cycle and will continue into the Golden Age of the Faith, see the entry on Ten Part Process in the Glossary.
[89] The pillars referred to are the National Spiritual Assemblies.
[90] The Hands of the Cause of God Amatu’l-Bahá Rúḥíyyih Khánum, Ugo Giachery, Ṭaráẓu’lláh Samandarí, ‘Alí-Akbar Furútan, Paul Haney, and Abdu’l-Qásim Faizi visited Adrianople on 27 September 1967 (the Feast of Will) to mark Bahá’u’lláh's Revelation of His Tablet to the Kings (Súriy-i-Mulúk), referred to by Shoghi Effendi as "the most momentous Tablet revealed by Bahá’u’lláh" (GPB, p. 171). See PB, pp. 7-12, 47-54, and 102-03, for passages from the Súriy-i-Mulúk that have been translated into English.
[91] See CC II:61-71.
[92] The Súriy-i-Mulúk is Bahá’u’lláh's Tablet to the Kings. For further information about its significance, see messages nos 24, 41, and 42. See also PB, pp. 7-12, 47-54, and 102-03 for the passages of the Súriy-i-Mulúk that have been translated into English.
[93] For an account of the six conferences, see BW 14:223-28.
[94] Bahá’u’lláh was exiled to Adrianople in December 1863, some eight months after proclaiming His mission to His followers, friends, and companions in the Garden of Riḍván outside of Baghdad, Iraq. Shoghi Effendi explains that toward the latter part of His stay in Adrianople "a period of prodigious activity ensued. . . ." "Such are the outpourings . . . from the clouds of Divine Bounty," Bahá’u’lláh Himself wrote, "that within the space of an hour the equivalent of a thousand verses hath been revealed." "I swear by God! In those days the equivalent of all that hath been sent down aforetime unto the Prophets hath been revealed" (GPB, pp. 170-70). Among the Tablets revealed during this period is the Súriy-i-Mulúk (Tablet to the Kings), "the most momentous Tablet revealed by Bahá’u’lláh in which He, for the first time, directs his words collectively to the entire company of the monarchs of East and West. . . ." (GPB, p. 171). For further information on the Súriy-i-Mulúk, see messages nos 24, 41, and 42.
[95] The crisis was caused by Mírzá Yaḥyá, Bahá’u’lláh's half-brother, whose covetousness and jealousy of Bahá’u’lláh prompted him to openly challenge Bahá’u’lláh's authority and to issue his own claim to be the Promised One. Mírzá Yaḥyá went so far as to attempt to murder Bahá’u’lláh by serving Him tea in a cup smeared with poison while Bahá’u’lláh was a guest in his home. The poison induced an illness that lasted over a month and was accompanied by severe pains and a high fever and left Bahá’u’lláh with a shaking hand for the rest of His life. This incident and other actions of Mírzá Yaḥyá's led to his separation from Bahá’u’lláh's family and companions. "This supreme crisis," Shoghi Effendi wrote, was designated by Bahá’u’lláh as the "Days of Stress," "during which 'the most grievous veil' was torn asunder, and the 'most great separation' was irrevocably effected. It immensely gratified and emboldened its [the Bahá’í Faith's external enemies, both civil and ecclesiastical, played into their hands, and evoked their unconcealed derision. It perplexed and confused the friends and supporters of Bahá’u’lláh, and seriously damaged the prestige of the Faith in the eyes of its western admirers. . . . It brought incalculable sorrow to Bahá’u’lláh, visibly aged Him, and inflicted, through its repercussions, the heaviest blow ever sustained by Him in His lifetime" (GPB, pp. 163-64).
[96] GPB, pp. 176-77. The first pilgrimages were made to the House of Amru’lláh (the House of God's Command) and foreshadowed later pilgrimages made by Bahá’ís from the East and the West to ‘Akká. The remains of the Báb were moved secretly at Bahá’u’lláh's instruction by two Bahá’ís from Tehran from the Shrine of the Imám-Zádih Ma’ṣúm to some other place of safety, an act that proved providential when the shrine later underwent reconstruction. Concerning the station of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Bahá’u’lláh revealed the Tablet of the Branch in which ‘Abdu’l-Bahá is extolled as the "Branch of Holiness," the "Limb of the Law of God," and the "Trust of God," "sent down in the form of a human temple" (quoted in WOB, pp. 134-35). The new laws Bahá’u’lláh revealed were those of pilgrimage and fasting, later set forth in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas. With respect to external developments, during the days in Adrianople Bahá’u’lláh revealed Tablets to the kings and rulers of the world; the terms "Bábí" and "the people of the Bayán" gave way to "Bahá’í" and "the people of Bahá"; the greeting "Alláh-u-Abhá" (God is Most Glorious) replaced "Alláh-u-Akbar" (God is Most Great); and certain disciples of Bahá’u’lláh arose to defend the Faith by refuting "in numerous and detailed apologies" the arguments of its opponents and "to expose their odious deeds." See GPB, pp. 176-77, and Hasan Balyuzi, Bahá’u’lláh: The King of Glory, p. 250.
[97] Bahá’u’lláh.
[98] For an explanation of the International Bahá’í Council, see the Glossary.
[99] In 1947 the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of the United States and Canada was accredited to the United Nations as a national non-governmental organization qualified to be represented at United Nations Conferences through a designated observer. One year later the eight existing National Spiritual Assemblies were recognized collectively as an international non-governmental organization under the title "The Bahá’í International Community." Each National Spiritual Assembly designated the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States as its representative at the United Nations. Mrs Mildred Mottahedeh, who also served as a member of the International Bahá’í Council from 1961 to 1963, was the observer for the Bahá’í International Community for nearly twenty years. The Bahá’í International Community, which now includes at least five million believers, 165 National Spiritual Assemblies, and approximately twenty thousand Local Spiritual Assemblies, maintains offices in New York and Geneva that are responsible for relations between the Bahá’í International Community and the United Nations. For more information about the development of the relationship between the Bahá’í International Community and the United Nations during the years 1963-73, see BW 15:364-73.
[100] The same extracts were also included in the Universal House of Justice's letter dated 31 October 1967 (message no. 52).
[101] The Blessed Beauty, Bahá’u’lláh, was born on 12 November 1817.
[102] On 12 August 1868 Bahá’u’lláh left Adrianople and journeyed four days to Gallipoli, a city in Turkey on the north side of the Dardenelles at the mouth of the Sea of Marmara. After a few days in Gallipoli, Bahá’u’lláh sailed in an Austrian steamer for Alexandria, where He was transferred to another ship. He arrived in ‘Akká on 31 August 1868. For a fuller account of the journey, see GPB, pp. 178-82, and H. M. Balyuzi, Bahá’u’lláh: The King of Glory, pp. 255-79.
[103] For additional letters on the topic, see messages no. 161 and 409.
[104] The Universal House of Justice permitted publication of portions of this letter to an individual who asked about the relationship of Bahá’ís to the social and political forces presently operating in the world, as it felt the explanation had general application in many parts of the world.
[105] For an explanation of the Lesser Peace, see the Glossary.
[106] For an explanation of the Most Great Peace, see the Glossary.
[107] The Major Plan is God's plan for humanity that Bahá’ís believe He Himself operates, which is tumultuous in its progress, which works through humanity as a whole, and which forges mankind into a unified body through the fires of suffering and tribulation. Its ultimate object is the Kingdom of God on earth. The Minor Plan is that part of God's plan which the Bahá’ís are called upon to carry out. It is clear and orderly and operates in the world through the plans, instructions, and guidance given by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, Shoghi Effendi, and now by the Universal House of Justice.
[108] In the 1982 edition see pp. 24, 29-33.
[109] See message no. 14.
[110] MBW, p. 123.
[111] For an account of the life and services of Hermann Grossmann, see BW 15:416-21.
[112] Shoghi Effendi explains that during the stay in Gallipoli, which lasted three nights, "no one knew what Bahá’u’lláh's destination would be. Some believed that He and His brothers would be banished to one place, and the remainder dispersed, and sent into exile. Others thought that His companions would be sent back to Persia, while still others expected their immediate extermination. . . ."
"So grievous were the dangers and trials confronting Bahá’u’lláh at the hour of His departure from Gallipoli that He warned His companions that 'this journey will be unlike any of the previous journeys,' and that whoever did not feel himself 'man enough to face the future' had best 'depart to whatever place he pleaseth, and be preserved from tests, for hereafter he will find himself unable to leave'―a warning which His companions unanimously chose to disregard" (GPB, pp. 181-82). For a fuller account of Bahá’u’lláh's journey from Adrianople to the Most Great Prison in ‘Akká, see GPB, pp. 178-82, and H. M. Balyuzi, Bahá’u’lláh: The King of Glory, pp. 255-68.
[113] Bahá’u’lláh's chief adversaries were Sultan ‘Abdu’l-‘Azíz of Turkey and Náṣiri’d-Dín Sháh of Persia. Bahá’u’lláh's banishments were to Baghdad, Iraq, January 1853―April 1863; to Constantinople (now Istanbul), Turkey, August―December 1863; to Adrianople (now Edirne), Turkey, December 1863-August 1868; and to ‘Akká, Palestine, August 1868. The "full flood" of Bahá’u’lláh's utterances refers to, among other things, His letters to the kings and rulers of the world.
[114] GPB, p. 253.
[115] Bahá’u’lláh revealed the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, the chief repository of His laws and the Mother Book of His Revelation, in ‘Akká circa 1873.
[116] GPB, p. 196.
[117] The classical age of Islamic civilization, the eighth through thirteenth centuries.
[118] Bahá’u’lláh sailed upon the Mediterranean Sea in 1868 during His journey from Gallipoli to ‘Akká. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, the Center of Bahá’u’lláh's Covenant, accompanied Bahá’u’lláh on that journey and later sailed upon the Mediterranean in the course of His travels to Egypt, Europe, and North America, 1910-13. Shoghi Effendi, the Sign of God on earth, traversed the Mediterranean in his travels to England to study at Oxford University and in the course of later visits to Europe.
[119] The Centenary of Bahá’u’lláh's arrival in the Holy Land was observed at the Bahá’í World Center 26―31 August 1968. About 1,800 Bahá’ís who attended the First Oceanic Conference in Palermo, Sicily, 23―25 August 1968, went to Israel to participate in the commemoration. For an account of the commemoration, see BW 15:81-86.
[120] For an account of the life and services of Luṭfu’lláh Ḥakím, see BW 15:430-34. See also message no. 48.
[121] Wilmette, near Chicago, USA; Ingleside, near Sydney, Australia; Kampala, Uganda; Langenhain, near Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
[122] For an account of the life and services of Ṭaráẓu’lláh Samandarí, see Bahá’í Writings 15:410-16.
[123] Memorial services were held in the Houses of Worship in Wilmette, near Chicago, USA; Ingleside, near Sydney, Australia; Kampala, Uganda; Langenhain, near Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
[124] GWB, pp. 196-97.
[125] See the August 1968 message to the First Oceanic Conference―Palermo, Sicily, (no. 63) for an explanation of the final banishment of Bahá’u’lláh and its significance.
[126] The years 1968 and 1969 were racked with war, violence, terrorism, and civil unrest around the world. Wars raged in Vietnam and Nigeria; Soviet and Chinese troops skirmished in a continuing border dispute; Soviet troops entered Czechoslovakia to quell a movement toward liberalization; and El Salvador invaded Honduras. Coups d'etat toppled governments in Iraq, Syria, Sierre Leone, Dahomey, the Congo, Mali, the Sudan, Libya, the Netherlands Antilles, Peru, Panama, and Bolivia; states of emergency were declared in Spain, Malaysia, and Chile; violent unrest occurred in West Germany, Spain, Bombay, Pakistan, Argentina, Kenya, and the United States; and student protests erupted in Paris, Mexico City, Czechoslovakia, Argentina, and the United States. United States and Israeli airliners were hijacked, and two Israeli airliners were attacked by terrorists. Moreover, a number of leaders were assassinated, including Somalian president Abdirascid Ali Scermarche; US civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr.; US presidential candidate Robert E. Kennedy; US ambassador to Guatemala John Gordon Mein; and Mozambique Liberation Front leader Eduardo Chivambo Mondlane.
[127] From a letter that was later published in the compilation Living the Life.
[128] The Feast of Sultan is the Feast of Sovereignty, 19 January.
[129] See message no. 73.
[130] WOB, p. 148.
[131] WT, p. 14.
[132] WOB, p. 19.
[133] WOB, pp. 149-50; WT, p. 11.
[134] WOB, p. 8.
[135] WOB, p. 150.
[136] "The Dawning-Place of Revelation" is a reference to the Manifestation of God; here, a specific reference to Bahá’u’lláh.
[137] Aghṣán (Branches) denotes the sons and male descendants of Bahá’u’lláh.
[138] See KA ¶42.
[139] WOB, p. 109.
[140] TABA 2:598; Star of the West, vol. 4, no. 10, p. 170; SWAB, pp. 210-11.
[141] WOB, p. 156, 23.
[142] KA ¶121.
[143] TB, pp. 217-23.
[144] WT, pp. 19, 26.
[145] See CC I:529-50.
[146] ADJ, p. 37.
[147] Quoted in Shoghi Effendi, letter dated 15 July 1955 to the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Central America.
[148] WOB, pp. 66-67.
[149] WOB, p. 67.
[150] PDIC, ¶v.
[151] WOB, pp. 41-42.
[152] In a meeting on 12 February 1970 the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, the functional committee of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) responsible for its relationship with nongovernmental organizations, had unanimously recommended that the Bahá’í International Community's application for consultative status be approved. ECOSOC formally accepted that recommendation on 27 May 1970.
[153] BA, p. 64.
[154] GPB, p. 348. For an account of the commemoration of the passing of the Purest Branch, see BW 15:163.
[155] MA, p. 31.
[156] MA, pp. 33, 34.
[157] The Purest Branch is Mírzá Mihdi, youngest son of Bahá’u’lláh. See message no. 80 regarding the 23 June 1970 commemoration of the centenary of his martyrdom.
[158] See TDP 6.11, 7.11, 14.7.
[159] TDP 6.8.
[160] TDP 6.8.
[161] One of the goals of the first Seven Year Plan (1937-44) was to establish a center in each republic in Latin America and the Caribbean; an objective of the second Seven Year Plan (1946-53) was the consolidation and expansion of the Faith throughout the Americas. The two plans were pursued by the Bahá’ís of the United States and Canada under Shoghi Effendi's direction. At the beginning of the Ten Year Crusade (1953-63) regional National Spiritual Assemblies had formed in both Central America and South America.
[162] MBW, p. 146.
[163] TDP 7.10.
[164] The list is too lengthy to include in this volume.
[165] See CC 2:39-60.
[166] This letter was sent to all National Spiritual Assemblies on 29 November 1970 for distribution to "all pioneers both on homefronts and overseas."
[167] TDP 7.8.
[168] Letter dated 12 August 1957 to Italy and Switzerland.
[169] MC, p. 68.
[170] Letter dated 21 October 1939 to an individual.
[171] GWB, p. 334.
[172] See ABL, p. 28, or PT, p. 61.
[173] The African Hand of the Cause of God referred to is Enoch Olinga. For an account of his life and services, see BW 18:618-35. For the message about his death, see no. 237.
[174] GWB, p. 136.
[175] For an account of the life and services of Agnes Alexander, see BW 15:423-30.
[176] BA, p. 55.
[177] The Universal House of Justice, in messages dated 16 July 1974 and 18 March 1981, has explained what editing is permissible when publishing its cables: (1) the word "STOP," when used to indicate the end of a sentence, may be replaced with a period; (2) transliteration of Persian and Arabic words may be added; (3) apostrophes may be added to possessive case nouns; (4) spelling mistakes made in transmission may be corrected; (5) capitalization may follow house style; (6) when both a cable and its letter of transmission are in hand, the date of the cable should be used, and only the text of the cable itself should be printed, unless the letter contains other pertinent information.
[178] For current instructions, consult the Bahá’í World Center Library.
[179] See the following message (no. 96).
[180] Bahíyyih Khánum, also known as the Greatest Holy Leaf, the daughter of Bahá’u’lláh and the sister of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá.
[181] The Apostolic Age of the Bahá’í Faith, also referred to as the Heroic Age, began in 1844 and concluded in 1921 with the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. For more details, see the entry on Ages in the Glossary.
[182] The "blissful Commonwealth" is the future worldwide community of Bahá’í nations, states, and localities that will give birth to a Bahá’í civilization.
[183] The three Ages of the Bahá’í Dispensation are the Heroic, Formative, and Golden Ages. For more information, see the entries for Ages and Dispensation in the Glossary.
[184] The Ministry of the Báb lasted from 1844 to 1853; the Ministry of Bahá’u’lláh, 1853 to 1892; and the Ministry of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, 1892 to 1921.
[185] 1921-44.
[186] TDP 6.9.
[187] TDP 6.13.
[188] WOB, p. 108.
[189] TDP 6.13.
[190] The second Age of the Bahá’í Dispensation, also called the Age of Transition or the Iron Age, the Formative Age began in 1921. For details, see the entry on Ages in the Glossary.
[191] Agnes Alexander became a Bahá’í in Rome in 1900 and on 26 December 1901 returned to her home in the Hawaiian Islands. After receiving a Tablet from ‘Abdu’l-Bahá encouraging her to travel to Japan to teach the Faith, she went there in 1914 and remained for twenty-three years. John Henry Hyde Dunn and his wife, Clara Dunn, also arose spontaneously after reading ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's statement in Tablets of the Divine Plan (7.8), "O that I could travel, even though on foot and in the utmost poverty, to these regions, and, raising the call of ‘Ya Bahá’u’l-Abhá' in cities, villages, mountains, deserts and oceans, promote the Divine teachings! This, alas, I cannot do. How intensely I deplore it! Please God, ye may achieve it." Mr Dunn resigned his position, and the Dunns left their home in San Francisco for Australia, arriving on 18 April 1920. Mr Dunn was sixty-two; Mrs Dunn was fifty. They remained in Australia until their deaths in 1941 and 1960, respectively. Martha Root arose in 1919 in response to ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's call and embarked upon the first of many journeys to which she dedicated herself throughout the remaining twenty years of her life. All four were elevated to the rank of Hand of the Cause of God, Miss Root being called by Shoghi Effendi the "foremost Hand which ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's will has raised up first Bahá’í century." For accounts of their lives and services, see: Agnes Alexander―BW 15:423-30; Hyde Dunn―BW 9:593-97; Clara Dunn―BW 13:859-62; and Martha Root―BW 13:643-48, and Mabel Garis, Martha Root. See also O. Z. Whitehead, "Father and Mother Dunn," in Some Bahá’ís to Remember, pp. 153-75. For the Universal House of Justice's message about Miss Alexander's passing, see no. 90.
[192] The "ten pillars" referred to are the National Spiritual Assemblies of Australia, Fiji Islands, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Hawaiian Islands, New Zealand, North West Pacific Ocean, Samoa, Solomon Islands, South West Pacific Ocean, and Tonga and the Cook Islands.
[193] TDP 7.5.
[194] For an account of the commemoration in the Holy Land and throughout the world of the fiftieth anniversary of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's passing, see BW 15:125-29. For an abridged version of the account by Shoghi Effendi and Lady Blomfield of the passing of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, see BW 15:113-24.
[195] Agnes Alexander traveled to Japan at ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's encouragement and remained there for twenty-three years (1914-37). For an account of her life and services, see BW 15:423-30. For the Universal House of Justice's message upon her passing, see no. 90; see also the May 1971 message to the South Pacific Oceanic Conference, (no. 98).
[196] TDP 7.15.
[197] The United States of America.
[198] TDP 5.2.
[199] For an account of the life and services of Músá Banání, see BW 15:421-23.
[200] See CC I:315-18 for a revised version provided by the Universal House of Justice in 1989.
[201] See CC 2:73-82.
[202] TDP 14.8.
[203] The International Teaching Conference held in conjunction with the dedication of the House of Worship was held in Panama City, 28 April―2 May 1972.
[204] See CC 1:25-44.
[205] TB, p. 221.
[206] For messages about the establishment and duties of the International Teaching Center, see nos. 131, 132, and 361.
[207] See CC 2:83-136.
[208] Bahíyyih Khánum, the Greatest Holy Leaf, is ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's sister; Mírzá Mihdí, the Purest Branch, His brother; and Ásíyih Khánum, the Most Exalted Leaf, His mother.
[209] For an explanation of the significance of the seat of the Universal House of Justice, see message no. 164. For information about steps in the process of its erection and occupation, see messages nos 136, 140, 165, 186, and 354.
[210] The second epoch of the Divine Plan began in 1963 at the commencement of the Nine Year Plan. See the entries on Divine Plan and Epochs in the Glossary.
[211] For Shoghi Effendi's description (see MBW, pp. 153-55) of that "vast", "majestic" ten-part process that began "at the dawn of the Adamic cycle" and will continue into the Golden Age of the Faith, see the entry on Ten Part Process in the Glossary.
[212] The Kitáb-i-Aqdas (the Most Holy Book) was referred to by Shoghi Effendi as "the Mother Book" of Bahá’u’lláh's Dispensation and "the Charter of His New World Order." The publication of a copiously annotated English translation was a goal of the Six Year Plan (see message no. 456). In its Riḍván 1992 letter the Universal House of Justice announced the forthcoming publication of the annotated English translation of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas during the Holy Year 1992-93. For background on the translation and publication of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, see message no. 27. For the announcement of the completion of A Synopsis and Codification of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, see message no. 125.
[213] 21 April (the First Day of Riḍván)―23 May (the Declaration of the Báb). The Third International Convention was held 26 April―2 May 1973, on the sixth through twelfth days of the Riḍván Festival.
[214] GWB, p. 315.
[215] The compilation accompanied a letter dated 11 August 1970 (no. 84). For the compilation, See CC 2:39-60. The by-laws of a local spiritual assembly can be found in The Bahá’í World, beginning with volume 3.
[216] For an account of the life and services of Ishráq-Khávarí, see BW 15:518-20.
[217] The compilation is too lengthy to include in this volume.
[218] From an unpublished Tablet.
[219] See CC II:1-27. The Pattern of Bahá’í Life is a compilation from the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá, and Shoghi Effendi that was published by the Bahá’í Publishing Trust of the British Isles in 1948.
[220] BA, p. 66.
[221] On the Day of the Covenant, 26 November, prayers were offered at the Shrine of Bahá’u’lláh at Bahjí, outside ‘Akká, and at the Shrine of the Báb on Mount Carmel in Haifa, where ‘Abdu’l-Bahá is also buried.
[222] See The Constitution of the Universal House of Justice, published by the Bahá’í World Center (1972).
[223] MA, p. 29.
[224] For the letter calling for worldwide observances of the centenary of the revelation of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas, see message no. 116. A copiously annotated English translation of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas and related texts was published in 1992.
[225] 21 March 1973.
[226] In its Riḍván 1967 message (no. 42) the Universal House of Justice announced that it would present to Heads of State around the world a collection of Tablets Bahá’u’lláh addressed to the kings and rulers of the world a century before. His Highness Malietoa Tanumafili II was one of the recipients.
[227] See BW 15:183 for a photograph of the Malietoa's letter.
[228] For a discussion of the Arc, see the Glossary.
[229] For an account of the life and services of John Ferraby, see BW 16:511-12.
[230] Ḥaram-i-Aqdas (the Most Holy Court) is a designation Shoghi Effendi gave to the north-western quadrant of the garden surrounding the Shrine of Bahá’u’lláh.
[231] For a discussion of the Arc, see the Glossary.
[232] 1.0 1.1 Citadel of Faith, pp. 4-5. Letter dated 5 June 1947 to the American Bahá’ís
[233] 2.0 2.1 2.2 The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 98. Letter dated 8 February 1934
[234] 3.0 3.1 The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh, p. 156. Letter dated 8 February 1934
[235] 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 Citadel of Faith, p. 5. Letter dated 5 June 1947 to the American Bahá’ís
[236] God Passes By, p. xv.
[237] God Passes By, p. xiv.
[238] God Passes By, p. 324.
[239] 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 8.4 Citadel of Faith, p. 6. Letter dated 5 June 1947 to the American Bahá’ís
[240] God Passes By, p. xiv.
[241] Messages to the Bahá’í World, p. 89. Cablegram dated 23 August 1955. See also letter dated 18 January 1953 written on behalf of the Guardian to the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States
[242] 11.0 11.1 Bahá’í News, no. 265 (March 1953): 4. Letter dated 18 January 1953 written on behalf of the Guardian to the National Spiritual Assembly of the United States
[243] 12.0 12.1 12.2 See also: 2 January 1986, Inception of the Fourth Epoch of the Formative Age
[244] See also: Universal House of Justice to the Bahá’ís of the World, Ridván 1964
[245] Messages to the Bahá’í World, p. 19. Cablegram dated 24 December 1951
[246] 15.0 15.1 Messages to the Bahá’í World, p. 13. Cablegram dated 25 April 1951
[247] Tawqi'at-i-Mubadrakih, BE 102-109 (Tihran: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, BE 125), pp. 99-188. Letter dated Naw-Ruz BE 105 to the Bahá’ís in the East.
[248] Citadel of Faith, p. 140. Letter dated 20 August 1955 to the American Bahá’ís
[249] Messages to the Bahá’í World, pp. 151-53. Letter dated 4 May 1953
[250] Messages to the Bahá’í World, pp. 18-20. Cablegram dated 24 December 1951
[251] Messages to the Bahá’í World, p. 44. Cablegram dated 8 October 1952. And, pp. 127-28. Letter dated October 1957
[252] Messages to the Bahá’í World, pp. 7-8. Cablegram dated 9 January 1951
[253] Unfolding Destiny, p. 261. Guardian's postscript to a letter dated 25 February 1951, written on his behalf to the National Spiritual Assembly of the British Isles
[254] 23.0 23.1 See also: October 1963, Announcement of the Nine Year Plan
[255] The Centre of the Covenant is one of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá's titles; the Sign of God is one of the titles ‘Abdu’l-Bahá used in His Will and Testament to refer to Shoghi Effendi the Guardian of the Cause of God
[256] See also: 19 May 1983, Futther evolution of the International Teaching Centre
[257] See also: 20 October 1983, Social and economic decelopment, new field of Bahá’í service
[258] See also: 21 June 1968, Announce decision to establish eleven Continental Boards of Counselors
[259] See also: 8 June 1973, Elucidation of duties of International Teaching Centre and expansion of Continental Boards of Counselors
[260] See also: 7 May 1973 Announce acceptance of Faith by Malietoa Tanumafili II and 7 October 1973, Expansion and reinforcement of the Auxiliary Boards
[261] See also: 2 February 1983, Occupation of the Seat of the Universal House of Justice
[262] Refer to Universal House of Justice message dated 16 January 2001 to the Bahá’ís of the World stating that the Faith had entered the fifth epoch of the Formative Age.
[263] Messages to the Bahá’í World, p. 155. Letter dated 4 May 1953