بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
اقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانْشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ
The Hour has drawn nigh: the moon is split.
2
وَإِنْ يَرَوْا آيَةً يُعْرِضُوا وَيَقُولُوا سِحْرٌ مُسْتَمِرٌّ
Yet if they see a sign they turn away, and they say 'A continuous sorcery!'
3
وَكَذَّبُوا وَاتَّبَعُوا أَهْوَاءَهُمْ ۚ وَكُلُّ أَمْرٍ مُسْتَقِرٌّ
They have cried lies, and followed their caprices; but every matter is settled.
4
وَلَقَدْ جَاءَهُمْ مِنَ الْأَنْبَاءِ مَا فِيهِ مُزْدَجَرٌ
And there have come to them such tidings as contain a deterrent --
5
حِكْمَةٌ بَالِغَةٌ ۖ فَمَا تُغْنِ النُّذُرُ
a Wisdom far-reaching; yet warnings do not avail.
6
فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ ۘ يَوْمَ يَدْعُ الدَّاعِ إِلَىٰ شَيْءٍ نُكُرٍ
So turn thou away from them. Upon the day when the Caller shall call unto a horrible thing,
7
خُشَّعًا أَبْصَارُهُمْ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ كَأَنَّهُمْ جَرَادٌ مُنْتَشِرٌ
abasing their eyes, they shall come forth from the tombs as if they were scattered grasshoppers,
8
مُهْطِعِينَ إِلَى الدَّاعِ ۖ يَقُولُ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا يَوْمٌ عَسِرٌ
running with outstretched necks to the Caller. The unbelievers shall say, 'This is a hard day!'
9
۞ كَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ فَكَذَّبُوا عَبْدَنَا وَقَالُوا مَجْنُونٌ وَازْدُجِرَ
The people of Noah cried lies before them; they cried lies to Our servant, and said, 'A man possessed!' And he was rejected.
10
فَدَعَا رَبَّهُ أَنِّي مَغْلُوبٌ فَانْتَصِرْ
And so he called unto his Lord, saying, 'I am vanquished; do Thou succour me!'
11
فَفَتَحْنَا أَبْوَابَ السَّمَاءِ بِمَاءٍ مُنْهَمِرٍ
Then We opened the gates of heaven unto water torrential,
12
وَفَجَّرْنَا الْأَرْضَ عُيُونًا فَالْتَقَى الْمَاءُ عَلَىٰ أَمْرٍ قَدْ قُدِرَ
and made the earth to gush with fountains, and the waters met for a matter decreed.
13
وَحَمَلْنَاهُ عَلَىٰ ذَاتِ أَلْوَاحٍ وَدُسُرٍ
And We bore him upon a well-planked vessel well-caulked
14
تَجْرِي بِأَعْيُنِنَا جَزَاءً لِمَنْ كَانَ كُفِرَ
running before Our eyes-a recompense for him denied.
15
وَلَقَدْ تَرَكْنَاهَا آيَةً فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ
And We left it for a sign. Is there any that will remember?
16
فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
How then were My chastisement and My warnings?
17
وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ
Now We have made the Koran easy for Remembrance. Is there any that will remember?
18
كَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
Ad cried lies. How then were My chastisement and My warnings?
19
إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ رِيحًا صَرْصَرًا فِي يَوْمِ نَحْسٍ مُسْتَمِرٍّ
We loosed against them a wind clamorous in a day of ill fortune continuous,
20
تَنْزِعُ النَّاسَ كَأَنَّهُمْ أَعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ مُنْقَعِرٍ
plucking up men as if they were stumps of uprooted palm-trees.
21
فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
How then were My chastisement and My warnings?
22
وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ
Now We have made the Koran easy for Remembrance. Is there any that will remember?
23
كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ بِالنُّذُرِ
Thamood cried lies to the warnings
24
فَقَالُوا أَبَشَرًا مِنَّا وَاحِدًا نَتَّبِعُهُ إِنَّا إِذًا لَفِي ضَلَالٍ وَسُعُرٍ
and said, 'What, shall we follow a mortal, one out of ourselves? Then indeed we should be in error and insanity!
25
أَأُلْقِيَ الذِّكْرُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا بَلْ هُوَ كَذَّابٌ أَشِرٌ
Has the Reminder been cast upon him alone among us? Nay, rather he is an impudent liar.'
26
سَيَعْلَمُونَ غَدًا مَنِ الْكَذَّابُ الْأَشِرُ
'They shall surely know tomorrow who is the impudent liar.
27
إِنَّا مُرْسِلُو النَّاقَةِ فِتْنَةً لَهُمْ فَارْتَقِبْهُمْ وَاصْطَبِرْ
They shall send the She-camel as a trial for them; so watch thou them and keep patience.
28
وَنَبِّئْهُمْ أَنَّ الْمَاءَ قِسْمَةٌ بَيْنَهُمْ ۖ كُلُّ شِرْبٍ مُحْتَضَرٌ
And tell them that the water is to be divided between them, each drink for each in turn.
29
فَنَادَوْا صَاحِبَهُمْ فَتَعَاطَىٰ فَعَقَرَ
Then they called their comrade, and he took in hand, and hamstrung her.
30
فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
How then were My chastisement and My warnings?
31
إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَكَانُوا كَهَشِيمِ الْمُحْتَظِرِ
We loosed against them one Cry, and they were as the wattles of a pen-builder.
32
وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ
Now We have made the Koran easy for Remembrance. Is there any that will remember?
33
كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ لُوطٍ بِالنُّذُرِ
The people of Lot cried lies to the warnings.
34
إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حَاصِبًا إِلَّا آلَ لُوطٍ ۖ نَجَّيْنَاهُمْ بِسَحَرٍ
We loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the folk of Lot; We delivered them at the dawn --
35
نِعْمَةً مِنْ عِنْدِنَا ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ نَجْزِي مَنْ شَكَرَ
a blessing from Us; even so We recompense him who is thankful.
36
وَلَقَدْ أَنْذَرَهُمْ بَطْشَتَنَا فَتَمَارَوْا بِالنُّذُرِ
He had warned them of Our assault, but they disputed the warnings.
37
وَلَقَدْ رَاوَدُوهُ عَنْ ضَيْفِهِ فَطَمَسْنَا أَعْيُنَهُمْ فَذُوقُوا عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
Even his guests they had solicited of him; so We obliterated their eyes, saying, 'Taste now My chastisement and My warnings!'
38
وَلَقَدْ صَبَّحَهُمْ بُكْرَةً عَذَابٌ مُسْتَقِرٌّ
In the morning early there came upon them a settled chastisement:
39
فَذُوقُوا عَذَابِي وَنُذُرِ
'Taste now My chastisement and My warnings!'
40
وَلَقَدْ يَسَّرْنَا الْقُرْآنَ لِلذِّكْرِ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ
Now We have made the Koran easy for Remembrance. Is there any that will remember?
41
وَلَقَدْ جَاءَ آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ النُّذُرُ
The warnings came also to Pharaoh's folk.
42
كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا كُلِّهَا فَأَخَذْنَاهُمْ أَخْذَ عَزِيزٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ
They cried lies to Our signs, all of them, so We seized them with the seizing of One mighty, omnipotent.
43
أَكُفَّارُكُمْ خَيْرٌ مِنْ أُولَٰئِكُمْ أَمْ لَكُمْ بَرَاءَةٌ فِي الزُّبُرِ
What, are your unbelievers better than those? Or have you an immunity in the Scrolls?
44
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ نَحْنُ جَمِيعٌ مُنْتَصِرٌ
Or do they say, 'We are a congregation that shall be succoured?'
45
سَيُهْزَمُ الْجَمْعُ وَيُوَلُّونَ الدُّبُرَ
Certainly the host shall be routed, and turn their backs.
46
بَلِ السَّاعَةُ مَوْعِدُهُمْ وَالسَّاعَةُ أَدْهَىٰ وَأَمَرُّ
Nay, but the Hour is their tryst, and the Hour is very calamitous and bitter.
47
إِنَّ الْمُجْرِمِينَ فِي ضَلَالٍ وَسُعُرٍ
Surely the sinners are in error and insanity!
48
يَوْمَ يُسْحَبُونَ فِي النَّارِ عَلَىٰ وُجُوهِهِمْ ذُوقُوا مَسَّ سَقَرَ
The day when they are dragged on their faces into the Fire: 'Taste now the touch of Sakar!'
49
إِنَّا كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَاهُ بِقَدَرٍ
Surely We have created everything in measure.
50
وَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ
Our commandment is but one word, as the twinkling of an eye.
51
وَلَقَدْ أَهْلَكْنَا أَشْيَاعَكُمْ فَهَلْ مِنْ مُدَّكِرٍ
We have destroyed the likes of you; is there any that will remember?
52
وَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ فَعَلُوهُ فِي الزُّبُرِ
Every thing that they have done is in the Scrolls,
53
وَكُلُّ صَغِيرٍ وَكَبِيرٍ مُسْتَطَرٌ
and everything, great and small, is inscribed.
54
إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَنَهَرٍ
Surely the godfearing shall dwell amid gardens and a river
55
فِي مَقْعَدِ صِدْقٍ عِنْدَ مَلِيكٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ
in a sure abode, in the presence of a King Omnipotent.
