بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
طسم
Ta Sin Mim
2
تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ
Those are the signs of the Manifest Book.
3
لَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَفْسَكَ أَلَّا يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ
Perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers.
4
إِنْ نَشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
If We will, We shall send down on them out of heaven a sign, so their necks will stay humbled to it.
5
وَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ ذِكْرٍ مِنَ الرَّحْمَٰنِ مُحْدَثٍ إِلَّا كَانُوا عَنْهُ مُعْرِضِينَ
But never fresh remembrance comes to them from the All-merciful, except they turn away from it.
6
فَقَدْ كَذَّبُوا فَسَيَأْتِيهِمْ أَنْبَاءُ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ
So they have cried lies; therefore assuredly tidings will come to them of that they mocked at.
7
أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى الْأَرْضِ كَمْ أَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ زَوْجٍ كَرِيمٍ
What, have they not regarded the earth, how many therein We have caused to grow of every generous kind?
8
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
9
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
10
وَإِذْ نَادَىٰ رَبُّكَ مُوسَىٰ أَنِ ائْتِ الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
And when thy Lord called to Moses, 'Go to the people of the evildoers,
11
قَوْمَ فِرْعَوْنَ ۚ أَلَا يَتَّقُونَ
the people of Pharaoh; will they not be godfearing?'
12
قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي أَخَافُ أَنْ يُكَذِّبُونِ
He said, 'My Lord, I fear they will cry me lies,
13
وَيَضِيقُ صَدْرِي وَلَا يَنْطَلِقُ لِسَانِي فَأَرْسِلْ إِلَىٰ هَارُونَ
and my breast will be straitened, and my tongue will not be loosed; so send to Aaron.
14
وَلَهُمْ عَلَيَّ ذَنْبٌ فَأَخَافُ أَنْ يَقْتُلُونِ
They also have a sin against me, and I fear they will slay me.'
15
قَالَ كَلَّا ۖ فَاذْهَبَا بِآيَاتِنَا ۖ إِنَّا مَعَكُمْ مُسْتَمِعُونَ
Said He, 'No indeed; but go, both of you, with Our signs, and We assuredly shall be with you, listening.
16
فَأْتِيَا فِرْعَوْنَ فَقُولَا إِنَّا رَسُولُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
So go you to Pharaoh, and say, "Verily, I am the Messenger of the Lord of all Being;
17
أَنْ أَرْسِلْ مَعَنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
so send forth with us the Children of Israel."
18
قَالَ أَلَمْ نُرَبِّكَ فِينَا وَلِيدًا وَلَبِثْتَ فِينَا مِنْ عُمُرِكَ سِنِينَ
He said, 'Did we not raise thee amongst us as a child? Didst thou not tarry among us years of thy life?
19
وَفَعَلْتَ فَعْلَتَكَ الَّتِي فَعَلْتَ وَأَنْتَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
And thou didst the deed thou didst, being one of the ungrateful!'
20
قَالَ فَعَلْتُهَا إِذًا وَأَنَا مِنَ الضَّالِّينَ
Said he, 'Indeed I did it then, being one of those that stray;
21
فَفَرَرْتُ مِنْكُمْ لَمَّا خِفْتُكُمْ فَوَهَبَ لِي رَبِّي حُكْمًا وَجَعَلَنِي مِنَ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
so I fled from you, fearing you. But my Lord gave me Judgment and made me one of the Envoys.
22
وَتِلْكَ نِعْمَةٌ تَمُنُّهَا عَلَيَّ أَنْ عَبَّدْتَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
That is a blessing thou reproachest me with, having enslaved the Children of Israel.'
23
قَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ وَمَا رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ
Pharaoh said, 'And what is the Lord of all Being?'
24
قَالَ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُوقِنِينَ
He said, 'The Lord of the heavens and earth, and what between them is, if you have faith.'
25
قَالَ لِمَنْ حَوْلَهُ أَلَا تَسْتَمِعُونَ
Said he to those about him, 'Do you not hear?'
26
قَالَ رَبُّكُمْ وَرَبُّ آبَائِكُمُ الْأَوَّلِينَ
He said, 'Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers, the ancients.'
27
قَالَ إِنَّ رَسُولَكُمُ الَّذِي أُرْسِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ لَمَجْنُونٌ
Said he, 'Surely your Messenger who was sent to you is possessed!'
28
قَالَ رَبُّ الْمَشْرِقِ وَالْمَغْرِبِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ
He said, 'The Lord of the East and West, and what between them is, if you have understanding,'
29
قَالَ لَئِنِ اتَّخَذْتَ إِلَٰهًا غَيْرِي لَأَجْعَلَنَّكَ مِنَ الْمَسْجُونِينَ
Said he, 'If thou takest a god other than me, I shall surely make thee one of the imprisoned.'
30
قَالَ أَوَلَوْ جِئْتُكَ بِشَيْءٍ مُبِينٍ
He said, 'What, even though I brought thee something so manifest?'
31
قَالَ فَأْتِ بِهِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
Said he, 'Bring it then, if thou art of the truthful.'
32
فَأَلْقَىٰ عَصَاهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ ثُعْبَانٌ مُبِينٌ
So he cast his staff, and behold, it was a serpent manifest.
33
وَنَزَعَ يَدَهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ بَيْضَاءُ لِلنَّاظِرِينَ
And he drew forth his hand, and lo, it was white to the beholders.
34
قَالَ لِلْمَلَإِ حَوْلَهُ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَسَاحِرٌ عَلِيمٌ
Said he to the Council about him, 'Surely this man is a cunning sorcerer
35
يُرِيدُ أَنْ يُخْرِجَكُمْ مِنْ أَرْضِكُمْ بِسِحْرِهِ فَمَاذَا تَأْمُرُونَ
who desires to expel you from your land by his sorcery; what do you command?'
36
قَالُوا أَرْجِهْ وَأَخَاهُ وَابْعَثْ فِي الْمَدَائِنِ حَاشِرِينَ
They said, 'Put him and his brother off a while, and send among the cities musterers,
37
يَأْتُوكَ بِكُلِّ سَحَّارٍ عَلِيمٍ
to bring thee every cunning sorcerer.
38
فَجُمِعَ السَّحَرَةُ لِمِيقَاتِ يَوْمٍ مَعْلُومٍ
So the sorcerers were assembled for the appointed time of a fixed day.
39
وَقِيلَ لِلنَّاسِ هَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُجْتَمِعُونَ
The people were asked, 'Will you assemble?
40
لَعَلَّنَا نَتَّبِعُ السَّحَرَةَ إِنْ كَانُوا هُمُ الْغَالِبِينَ
Haply we shall follow the sorcerers if it should be they are the victors.'
41
فَلَمَّا جَاءَ السَّحَرَةُ قَالُوا لِفِرْعَوْنَ أَئِنَّ لَنَا لَأَجْرًا إِنْ كُنَّا نَحْنُ الْغَالِبِينَ
Then, when the sorcerers came, they said to Pharaoh, 'Shall we indeed have a wage, if we should be the victors?'
42
قَالَ نَعَمْ وَإِنَّكُمْ إِذًا لَمِنَ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ
He said, 'Yes indeed; and you shall then be among the near-stationed.'
43
قَالَ لَهُمْ مُوسَىٰ أَلْقُوا مَا أَنْتُمْ مُلْقُونَ
Moses said to them, 'Cast you down what you will cast.'
44
فَأَلْقَوْا حِبَالَهُمْ وَعِصِيَّهُمْ وَقَالُوا بِعِزَّةِ فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّا لَنَحْنُ الْغَالِبُونَ
So they cast their ropes and their staffs, and said, 'By the might of Pharaoh we shall be the victors.'
45
فَأَلْقَىٰ مُوسَىٰ عَصَاهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ تَلْقَفُ مَا يَأْفِكُونَ
Then Moses cast his staff and lo, it forthwith swallowed up their lying invention;
46
فَأُلْقِيَ السَّحَرَةُ سَاجِدِينَ
so the sorcerers were cast down, bowing themselves.
47
قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
They said, 'We believe in the Lord of all Being,
48
رَبِّ مُوسَىٰ وَهَارُونَ
the Lord of Moses and Aaron.'
49
قَالَ آمَنْتُمْ لَهُ قَبْلَ أَنْ آذَنَ لَكُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُ لَكَبِيرُكُمُ الَّذِي عَلَّمَكُمُ السِّحْرَ فَلَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ ۚ لَأُقَطِّعَنَّ أَيْدِيَكُمْ وَأَرْجُلَكُمْ مِنْ خِلَافٍ وَلَأُصَلِّبَنَّكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
Said Pharaoh, 'You have believed him before I gave you leave. Why, he is the chief of you, the same that taught you sorcery; now you shall know! I shall assuredly cut off alternately your hands and feet, then I shall crucify you all together.'
50
قَالُوا لَا ضَيْرَ ۖ إِنَّا إِلَىٰ رَبِّنَا مُنْقَلِبُونَ
They said, 'There is no harm; surely unto our Lord we are turning.
51
إِنَّا نَطْمَعُ أَنْ يَغْفِرَ لَنَا رَبُّنَا خَطَايَانَا أَنْ كُنَّا أَوَّلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
We are eager that our Lord should forgive us our offences, for that we are the first of the believers.'
52
۞ وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ أَنْ أَسْرِ بِعِبَادِي إِنَّكُمْ مُتَّبَعُونَ
Also We revealed unto Moses, 'Go with My servants by night; surely you will be followed.'
53
فَأَرْسَلَ فِرْعَوْنُ فِي الْمَدَائِنِ حَاشِرِينَ
Then Pharaoh sent among the cities musterers:
54
إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ لَشِرْذِمَةٌ قَلِيلُونَ
'Behold, these are a small troop,
55
وَإِنَّهُمْ لَنَا لَغَائِظُونَ
and indeed they are enraging us;
56
وَإِنَّا لَجَمِيعٌ حَاذِرُونَ
and we are a host on our guard.'
57
فَأَخْرَجْنَاهُمْ مِنْ جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ
So We expelled them from gardens and fountains,
58
وَكُنُوزٍ وَمَقَامٍ كَرِيمٍ
and treasures and a noble station;
59
كَذَٰلِكَ وَأَوْرَثْنَاهَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
even so, and We bequeathed them upon the Children of Israel.
60
فَأَتْبَعُوهُمْ مُشْرِقِينَ
Then they followed them at the sunrise;
61
فَلَمَّا تَرَاءَى الْجَمْعَانِ قَالَ أَصْحَابُ مُوسَىٰ إِنَّا لَمُدْرَكُونَ
and, when the two hosts sighted each other, the companions of Moses said, 'We are overtaken!'
62
قَالَ كَلَّا ۖ إِنَّ مَعِيَ رَبِّي سَيَهْدِينِ
Said he, 'No indeed; surely my Lord is with me; He will guide me.'
63
فَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَىٰ مُوسَىٰ أَنِ اضْرِبْ بِعَصَاكَ الْبَحْرَ ۖ فَانْفَلَقَ فَكَانَ كُلُّ فِرْقٍ كَالطَّوْدِ الْعَظِيمِ
Then We revealed to Moses, 'Strike with thy staff the sea'; and it clave, and each part was as a mighty mount.
64
وَأَزْلَفْنَا ثَمَّ الْآخَرِينَ
And there We brought the others on,
65
وَأَنْجَيْنَا مُوسَىٰ وَمَنْ مَعَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ
and We delivered Moses and those with him all together;
66
ثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا الْآخَرِينَ
then We drowned the others.
67
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
68
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
69
وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ
And recite to them the tiding of Abraham
70
إِذْ قَالَ لِأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ
when he said to his father and his people, 'What do you serve?'
71
قَالُوا نَعْبُدُ أَصْنَامًا فَنَظَلُّ لَهَا عَاكِفِينَ
They said, 'We serve idols, and continue cleaving to them.
72
قَالَ هَلْ يَسْمَعُونَكُمْ إِذْ تَدْعُونَ
He said, 'Do they hear you when you call,
73
أَوْ يَنْفَعُونَكُمْ أَوْ يَضُرُّونَ
or do they profit you, or harm?'
74
قَالُوا بَلْ وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا كَذَٰلِكَ يَفْعَلُونَ
They said, 'Nay, but we found our fathers so doing.'
75
قَالَ أَفَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْبُدُونَ
He said, 'And have you considered what you have been serving,
76
أَنْتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُمُ الْأَقْدَمُونَ
you and your fathers, the elders?
77
فَإِنَّهُمْ عَدُوٌّ لِي إِلَّا رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ
They are an enemy to me, except the Lord of all Being
78
الَّذِي خَلَقَنِي فَهُوَ يَهْدِينِ
who created me, and Himself guides me,
79
وَالَّذِي هُوَ يُطْعِمُنِي وَيَسْقِينِ
and Himself gives me to eat and drink,
80
وَإِذَا مَرِضْتُ فَهُوَ يَشْفِينِ
and, whenever I am sick, heals me,
81
وَالَّذِي يُمِيتُنِي ثُمَّ يُحْيِينِ
who makes me to die, then gives me life,
82
وَالَّذِي أَطْمَعُ أَنْ يَغْفِرَ لِي خَطِيئَتِي يَوْمَ الدِّينِ
and who I am eager shall forgive me my offence on the Day of Doom.
83
رَبِّ هَبْ لِي حُكْمًا وَأَلْحِقْنِي بِالصَّالِحِينَ
My Lord, give me Judgment, and join me with the righteous,
84
وَاجْعَلْ لِي لِسَانَ صِدْقٍ فِي الْآخِرِينَ
and appoint me a tongue of truthfulness among the others.
85
وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ وَرَثَةِ جَنَّةِ النَّعِيمِ
Make me one of the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss
86
وَاغْفِرْ لِأَبِي إِنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الضَّالِّينَ
and forgive my father, for he is one of those astray.
87
وَلَا تُخْزِنِي يَوْمَ يُبْعَثُونَ
Degrade me not upon the day when they are raised up,
88
يَوْمَ لَا يَنْفَعُ مَالٌ وَلَا بَنُونَ
the day when neither wealth nor sons shall profit
89
إِلَّا مَنْ أَتَى اللَّهَ بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ
except for him who comes to God with a pure heart.
90
وَأُزْلِفَتِ الْجَنَّةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
And Paradise shall be brought forward for the godfearing,
91
وَبُرِّزَتِ الْجَحِيمُ لِلْغَاوِينَ
and Hell advanced for the perverse.
92
وَقِيلَ لَهُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْبُدُونَ
It shall be said to them, 'Where is that you were serving
93
مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ هَلْ يَنْصُرُونَكُمْ أَوْ يَنْتَصِرُونَ
apart from God? Do they help you or help themselves?'
94
فَكُبْكِبُوا فِيهَا هُمْ وَالْغَاوُونَ
Then they shall be pitched into it, they and the perverse
95
وَجُنُودُ إِبْلِيسَ أَجْمَعُونَ
and the hosts of Iblis, all together.
96
قَالُوا وَهُمْ فِيهَا يَخْتَصِمُونَ
They shall say, as they dispute there one with another,
97
تَاللَّهِ إِنْ كُنَّا لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِينٍ
'By God, we were certainly in manifest error
98
إِذْ نُسَوِّيكُمْ بِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
when we made you equal with the Lord of all Being.
99
وَمَا أَضَلَّنَا إِلَّا الْمُجْرِمُونَ
It was naught but the sinners that led us astray;
100
فَمَا لَنَا مِنْ شَافِعِينَ
so now we have no intercessors,
101
وَلَا صَدِيقٍ حَمِيمٍ
no loyal friend.
102
فَلَوْ أَنَّ لَنَا كَرَّةً فَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
O that we might return again, and be among the believers!'
103
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
104
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
105
كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
The people of Noah cried lies to the Envoys
106
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ نُوحٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ
when their brother Noah said to them, 'Will you not be godfearing?
107
إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ
I am for you a faithful Messenger,
108
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
so serve you God, and obey you me.
109
وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
I ask of you no wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord of all Being;
110
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
so fear you God, and obey you me.'
111
۞ قَالُوا أَنُؤْمِنُ لَكَ وَاتَّبَعَكَ الْأَرْذَلُونَ
They said, 'Shall we believe thee, whom the vilest follow?'
112
قَالَ وَمَا عِلْمِي بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
He said, 'What knowledge have I of that they have been doing?
113
إِنْ حِسَابُهُمْ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّي ۖ لَوْ تَشْعُرُونَ
Their account falls only upon my Lord, were you but aware.
114
وَمَا أَنَا بِطَارِدِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
I would not drive away the believers;
115
إِنْ أَنَا إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
'I am naught but a plain warner.'
116
قَالُوا لَئِنْ لَمْ تَنْتَهِ يَا نُوحُ لَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمَرْجُومِينَ
They said, 'If thou givest not over, Noah, thou shalt assuredly be one of the stoned.'
117
قَالَ رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي كَذَّبُونِ
He said, 'My Lord, my people have cried me lies,
118
فَافْتَحْ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَهُمْ فَتْحًا وَنَجِّنِي وَمَنْ مَعِيَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
so give true deliverance between me and them, and deliver me and the believers that are with me.
119
فَأَنْجَيْنَاهُ وَمَنْ مَعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ
So We delivered him, and those with him, in the laden ship,
120
ثُمَّ أَغْرَقْنَا بَعْدُ الْبَاقِينَ
then afterwards We drowned the rest.
121
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
122
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
123
كَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
Ad cried lies to the Envoys
124
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ هُودٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ
when their brother Hood said to them, 'Will you not be godfearing?
125
إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ
I am for you a faithful Messenger,
126
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
so fear you God, and obey you me.
127
وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
I ask of you no wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord of all Being.
128
أَتَبْنُونَ بِكُلِّ رِيعٍ آيَةً تَعْبَثُونَ
What, do you build on every prominence a sign, sporting,
129
وَتَتَّخِذُونَ مَصَانِعَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَخْلُدُونَ
and do you take to you castles, haply to dwell forever?
130
وَإِذَا بَطَشْتُمْ بَطَشْتُمْ جَبَّارِينَ
When you assault, you assault like tyrants!
131
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
So fear you God, and obey you me;
132
وَاتَّقُوا الَّذِي أَمَدَّكُمْ بِمَا تَعْلَمُونَ
and fear Him who has succoured you with what you know,
133
أَمَدَّكُمْ بِأَنْعَامٍ وَبَنِينَ
succoured you with flocks and sons,
134
وَجَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ
gardens and fountains.
135
إِنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
'Indeed, I fear for you the chastisement of a dreadful day.'
136
قَالُوا سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْنَا أَوَعَظْتَ أَمْ لَمْ تَكُنْ مِنَ الْوَاعِظِينَ
They said, 'Alike it is to us, whether thou admonishest, or art not one of the admonishers;
137
إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا خُلُقُ الْأَوَّلِينَ
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients,
138
وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ
and we shall not be chastised.'
139
فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ ۗ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
So they cried him lies; then We destroyed them. Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
140
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
141
كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
Thamood cried lies to the Envoys
142
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ صَالِحٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ
when their brother Salih said to them, 'Will you not be godfearing?
143
إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ
I am for you a faithful Messenger,
144
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
so fear you God, and obey you me.'
145
وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
'I ask of you no wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord of all Being.
146
أَتُتْرَكُونَ فِي مَا هَاهُنَا آمِنِينَ
Will you be left secure in this here,
147
فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ
among gardens and fountains,
148
وَزُرُوعٍ وَنَخْلٍ طَلْعُهَا هَضِيمٌ
sown fields, and palms with slender spathes?
149
وَتَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا فَارِهِينَ
Will you still skilfully hew houses out of the mountains?
150
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
So fear you God, and obey you me;
151
وَلَا تُطِيعُوا أَمْرَ الْمُسْرِفِينَ
and obey not the commandment of the prodigal
152
الَّذِينَ يُفْسِدُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا يُصْلِحُونَ
who do corruption in the earth, and set not things aright.'
153
قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مِنَ الْمُسَحَّرِينَ
They said, 'Thou art merely one of those that are bewitched;
154
مَا أَنْتَ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُنَا فَأْتِ بِآيَةٍ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
thou art naught but a mortal, like us; then produce a sign, if thou art one of the truthful.'
155
قَالَ هَٰذِهِ نَاقَةٌ لَهَا شِرْبٌ وَلَكُمْ شِرْبُ يَوْمٍ مَعْلُومٍ
He said, 'This is a she-camel; to her a draught and to you a draught, on a day appointed,
156
وَلَا تَمَسُّوهَا بِسُوءٍ فَيَأْخُذَكُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
and do not touch her with malice so that there seize you the chastisement of a dreadful day.'
157
فَعَقَرُوهَا فَأَصْبَحُوا نَادِمِينَ
But they hamstrung her, and in the morning they were remorseful,
158
فَأَخَذَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ ۗ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
and the chastisement seized them. Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
159
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
160
كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ لُوطٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
The people of Lot cried lies to the Envoys
161
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ أَخُوهُمْ لُوطٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ
when their brother Lot said to them, 'Will you not be godfearing?
162
إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ
I am for you a faithful Messenger,
163
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
so fear you God, and obey you me.
164
وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
I ask of you no wage for this; my wage falls only upon the Lord of all Being.
165
أَتَأْتُونَ الذُّكْرَانَ مِنَ الْعَالَمِينَ
What, do you come to male beings,
166
وَتَذَرُونَ مَا خَلَقَ لَكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ مِنْ أَزْوَاجِكُمْ ۚ بَلْ أَنْتُمْ قَوْمٌ عَادُونَ
leaving your wives that your Lord created for you? Nay, but you are a people of transgressors.
167
قَالُوا لَئِنْ لَمْ تَنْتَهِ يَا لُوطُ لَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْمُخْرَجِينَ
They said, 'If thou givest not over, Lot, thou shalt assuredly be one of the expelled.'
168
قَالَ إِنِّي لِعَمَلِكُمْ مِنَ الْقَالِينَ
He said, 'Truly I am a detester of what you do.
169
رَبِّ نَجِّنِي وَأَهْلِي مِمَّا يَعْمَلُونَ
My Lord, deliver me and my people from that they do.'
170
فَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَأَهْلَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ
So We delivered him and his people all together,
171
إِلَّا عَجُوزًا فِي الْغَابِرِينَ
save an old woman among those that tarried;
172
ثُمَّ دَمَّرْنَا الْآخَرِينَ
then We destroyed the others,
173
وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ مَطَرًا ۖ فَسَاءَ مَطَرُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ
and We rained on them a rain; and evil is the rain of them that are warned.
174
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
175
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
176
كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
The men of the Thicket cried lies to the Envoys
177
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُمْ شُعَيْبٌ أَلَا تَتَّقُونَ
when Shuaib said to them, 'Will you not be godfearing?
178
إِنِّي لَكُمْ رَسُولٌ أَمِينٌ
I am for you a faithful Messenger, so fear you God, and obey you me.
179
فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُونِ
I ask of you no wage for this;
180
وَمَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ ۖ إِنْ أَجْرِيَ إِلَّا عَلَىٰ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
my wage falls only upon the Lord of all Being.
181
۞ أَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ وَلَا تَكُونُوا مِنَ الْمُخْسِرِينَ
Fill up the measure, and be not cheaters,
182
وَزِنُوا بِالْقِسْطَاسِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِ
and weigh with the straight balance,
183
وَلَا تَبْخَسُوا النَّاسَ أَشْيَاءَهُمْ وَلَا تَعْثَوْا فِي الْأَرْضِ مُفْسِدِينَ
and diminish not the goods of the people, and do not mischief in the earth, working corruption.
184
وَاتَّقُوا الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ وَالْجِبِلَّةَ الْأَوَّلِينَ
Fear Him who created you, and the generations of the ancients.'
185
قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مِنَ الْمُسَحَّرِينَ
They said, 'Thou art merely one of those that are bewitched;
186
وَمَا أَنْتَ إِلَّا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُنَا وَإِنْ نَظُنُّكَ لَمِنَ الْكَاذِبِينَ
thou art naught but a mortal, like us; indeed, we think that thou art one of the liars.
187
فَأَسْقِطْ عَلَيْنَا كِسَفًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
Then drop down on us lumps from heaven, if thou art one of the truthful.'
188
قَالَ رَبِّي أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
He said, 'My Lord knows very well what you are doing.'
189
فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَخَذَهُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمِ الظُّلَّةِ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
But they cried him lies; then there seized them the chastisement of the Day of Shadow; assuredly it was the chastisement of a dreadful day.
190
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً ۖ وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
Surely in that is a sign, yet most of them are not believers.
191
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-mighty, the All-compassionate.
192
وَإِنَّهُ لَتَنْزِيلُ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
Truly it is the revelation of the Lord of all Being,
193
نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ
brought down by the Faithful Spirit
194
عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُنْذِرِينَ
upon thy heart, that thou mayest be one of the warners,
195
بِلِسَانٍ عَرَبِيٍّ مُبِينٍ
in a clear, Arabic tongue.
196
وَإِنَّهُ لَفِي زُبُرِ الْأَوَّلِينَ
Truly it is in the Scriptures of the ancients.
197
أَوَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُمْ آيَةً أَنْ يَعْلَمَهُ عُلَمَاءُ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
Was it not a sign for them, that it is known to the learned of the Children of Israel?
198
وَلَوْ نَزَّلْنَاهُ عَلَىٰ بَعْضِ الْأَعْجَمِينَ
If We had sent it down on a barbarian
199
فَقَرَأَهُ عَلَيْهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ مُؤْمِنِينَ
and he had recited it to them, they would not have believed in it.
200
كَذَٰلِكَ سَلَكْنَاهُ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ
Even so We have caused it to enter into the hearts of the sinners,
201
لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ حَتَّىٰ يَرَوُا الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ
who will not believe in it, until they see the painful chastisement
202
فَيَأْتِيَهُمْ بَغْتَةً وَهُمْ لَا يَشْعُرُونَ
so that it will come upon them suddenly, while they are not aware,
203
فَيَقُولُوا هَلْ نَحْنُ مُنْظَرُونَ
and they will say, 'Shall we be respited?'
204
أَفَبِعَذَابِنَا يَسْتَعْجِلُونَ
What, do they seek to hasten Our chastisement?
205
أَفَرَأَيْتَ إِنْ مَتَّعْنَاهُمْ سِنِينَ
What thinkest thou? If We give them enjoyment of days for many years,
206
ثُمَّ جَاءَهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ
then there comes on them that they were promised,
207
مَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يُمَتَّعُونَ
what will it then avail them, the enjoyment of days they were given?
208
وَمَا أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ إِلَّا لَهَا مُنْذِرُونَ
Never a city We destroyed, but it had warners
209
ذِكْرَىٰ وَمَا كُنَّا ظَالِمِينَ
for a reminder; and never did We wrong.
210
وَمَا تَنَزَّلَتْ بِهِ الشَّيَاطِينُ
Not by the Satans has it been brought down;
211
وَمَا يَنْبَغِي لَهُمْ وَمَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ
it behoves them not, neither are they able.
212
إِنَّهُمْ عَنِ السَّمْعِ لَمَعْزُولُونَ
Truly, they are expelled from hearing.
213
فَلَا تَدْعُ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ فَتَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُعَذَّبِينَ
So call thou not upon another god with God, lest thou shouldst be one of those that are chastised.
214
وَأَنْذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ
And warn thy clan, thy nearest kin.
215
وَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ لِمَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
Lower thy wing to those who follow thee, being believers;
216
فَإِنْ عَصَوْكَ فَقُلْ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ
then, if they disobey thee, say, 'I am quit of that you do.'
217
وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى الْعَزِيزِ الرَّحِيمِ
Put thy trust in the All-mighty, the All-compassionate
218
الَّذِي يَرَاكَ حِينَ تَقُومُ
who sees thee when thou standest
219
وَتَقَلُّبَكَ فِي السَّاجِدِينَ
and when thou turnest about among those who bow.
220
إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
Surely He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing.
221
هَلْ أُنَبِّئُكُمْ عَلَىٰ مَنْ تَنَزَّلُ الشَّيَاطِينُ
Shall I tell you on whom the Satans come down?
222
تَنَزَّلُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ أَفَّاكٍ أَثِيمٍ
They come down on every guilty impostor.
223
يُلْقُونَ السَّمْعَ وَأَكْثَرُهُمْ كَاذِبُونَ
They give ear, but most of them are liars.
224
وَالشُّعَرَاءُ يَتَّبِعُهُمُ الْغَاوُونَ
And the poets -- the perverse follow them;
225
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّهُمْ فِي كُلِّ وَادٍ يَهِيمُونَ
hast thou not seen how they wander in every valley
226
وَأَنَّهُمْ يَقُولُونَ مَا لَا يَفْعَلُونَ
and how they say that which they do not?
227
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَذَكَرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا وَانْتَصَرُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا ظُلِمُوا ۗ وَسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَيَّ مُنْقَلَبٍ يَنْقَلِبُونَ
Save those that believe, and do righteous deeds, and remember God oft, and help themselves after being wronged; and those who do wrong shall surely know by what overturning they will he overturned.
