بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
الر ۚ تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ وَقُرْآنٍ مُبِينٍ
Alif Lam Ra. Those are the signs of the Book and of a manifest Koran.
2
رُبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ كَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ
Perchance the unbelievers will wish that they had surrendered:
3
ذَرْهُمْ يَأْكُلُوا وَيَتَمَتَّعُوا وَيُلْهِهِمُ الْأَمَلُ ۖ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ
leave them to eat, and to take their joy, and to be bemused by hope; certainly they will soon know!
4
وَمَا أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ إِلَّا وَلَهَا كِتَابٌ مَعْلُومٌ
Never a city have We destroyed, but it had a known decree,
5
مَا تَسْبِقُ مِنْ أُمَّةٍ أَجَلَهَا وَمَا يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ
and no nation outstrips its term, nor do they put it back.
6
وَقَالُوا يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِي نُزِّلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ إِنَّكَ لَمَجْنُونٌ
They say: 'Thou, upon whom the Remembrance is sent down, thou art assuredly possessed!
7
لَوْ مَا تَأْتِينَا بِالْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الصَّادِقِينَ
Why dost thou not bring the angels unto us, if thou speakest truly?'
8
مَا نُنَزِّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةَ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ وَمَا كَانُوا إِذًا مُنْظَرِينَ
We send not down the angels, save with truth;
9
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ
then they would not be respited. It is We who have sent down the Remembrance, and We watch over it.
10
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فِي شِيَعِ الْأَوَّلِينَ
Indeed, We sent Messengers before thee, among the factions of the ancients,
11
وَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ
and not a single Messenger came to them, but they mocked at him;
12
كَذَٰلِكَ نَسْلُكُهُ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ
even so We cause it to enter into the hearts of the sinners --
13
لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ ۖ وَقَدْ خَلَتْ سُنَّةُ الْأَوَّلِينَ
they believe not in it, though the wont of the ancients is already gone.
14
وَلَوْ فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ بَابًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ فَظَلُّوا فِيهِ يَعْرُجُونَ
Though We opened to them a gate in heaven, and still they mounted through it,
15
لَقَالُوا إِنَّمَا سُكِّرَتْ أَبْصَارُنَا بَلْ نَحْنُ قَوْمٌ مَسْحُورُونَ
yet would they say, 'Our eyes have been dazzled; nay, we are a people bewitched!'
16
وَلَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا فِي السَّمَاءِ بُرُوجًا وَزَيَّنَّاهَا لِلنَّاظِرِينَ
We have set in heaven constellations and decked them out fair to the beholders,
17
وَحَفِظْنَاهَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْطَانٍ رَجِيمٍ
and guarded them from every accursed Satan
18
إِلَّا مَنِ اسْتَرَقَ السَّمْعَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ مُبِينٌ
excepting such as listens by stealth -- and he is pursued by a manifest flame.
19
وَالْأَرْضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا وَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ مَوْزُونٍ
And the earth -- We stretched it forth, and cast on it firm mountains, and We caused to grow therein of every thing justly weighed,
20
وَجَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا مَعَايِشَ وَمَنْ لَسْتُمْ لَهُ بِرَازِقِينَ
and there appointed for you livelihood, and for those you provide not for.
21
وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا عِنْدَنَا خَزَائِنُهُ وَمَا نُنَزِّلُهُ إِلَّا بِقَدَرٍ مَعْلُومٍ
Naught is there, but its treasuries are with Us, and We send it not down but in a known measure.
22
وَأَرْسَلْنَا الرِّيَاحَ لَوَاقِحَ فَأَنْزَلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَسْقَيْنَاكُمُوهُ وَمَا أَنْتُمْ لَهُ بِخَازِنِينَ
And We loose the winds fertilising, and We send down out of heaven water, then We give it to you to drink, and you are not its treasurers.
23
وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ نُحْيِي وَنُمِيتُ وَنَحْنُ الْوَارِثُونَ
It is We who give life, and make to die, and it is We who are the inheritors.
24
وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَقْدِمِينَ مِنْكُمْ وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَأْخِرِينَ
We know the ones of you who press forward, and We know the laggards;
25
وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ يَحْشُرُهُمْ ۚ إِنَّهُ حَكِيمٌ عَلِيمٌ
and it is thy Lord shall muster them, and He is All-wise, All-knowing.
26
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ مِنْ صَلْصَالٍ مِنْ حَمَإٍ مَسْنُونٍ
Surely We created man of a clay of mud moulded,
27
وَالْجَانَّ خَلَقْنَاهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ مِنْ نَارِ السَّمُومِ
and the jinn created We before of fire flaming.
28
وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقٌ بَشَرًا مِنْ صَلْصَالٍ مِنْ حَمَإٍ مَسْنُونٍ
And when thy Lord said to the angels, 'See, I am creating a mortal of a clay of mud moulded.
29
فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي فَقَعُوا لَهُ سَاجِدِينَ
When I have shaped him, and breathed My spirit in him, fall you down, bowing before him!'
30
فَسَجَدَ الْمَلَائِكَةُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ
Then the angels bowed themselves all together,
31
إِلَّا إِبْلِيسَ أَبَىٰ أَنْ يَكُونَ مَعَ السَّاجِدِينَ
save Iblis; he refused to be among those bowing.
32
قَالَ يَا إِبْلِيسُ مَا لَكَ أَلَّا تَكُونَ مَعَ السَّاجِدِينَ
Said He, 'What ails thee, Iblis, that thou art not among those bowing?'
33
قَالَ لَمْ أَكُنْ لِأَسْجُدَ لِبَشَرٍ خَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ صَلْصَالٍ مِنْ حَمَإٍ مَسْنُونٍ
Said he, 'I would never bow myself before a mortal whom Thou hast created of a clay of mud moulded.'
34
قَالَ فَاخْرُجْ مِنْهَا فَإِنَّكَ رَجِيمٌ
Said He, 'Then go thou forth hence; thou art accursed.
35
وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكَ اللَّعْنَةَ إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ
Upon thee shall rest the curse, till the Day of Doom.'
36
قَالَ رَبِّ فَأَنْظِرْنِي إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ
Said he, 'My Lord, respite me till the day they shall be raised.'
37
قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ مِنَ الْمُنْظَرِينَ
Said He, 'Thou art among the ones that are respited
38
إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْوَقْتِ الْمَعْلُومِ
unto the day of a known time.'
39
قَالَ رَبِّ بِمَا أَغْوَيْتَنِي لَأُزَيِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
Said he, 'My Lord, for Thy perverting me I shall deck all fair to them in the earth, and I shall pervert them, all together,
40
إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ
excepting those Thy servants among them that are devoted.
41
قَالَ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ عَلَيَّ مُسْتَقِيمٌ
Said He, 'This is for Me a straight path:
42
إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ إِلَّا مَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ
over My servants thou shalt have no authority, except those that follow thee,
43
وَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ لَمَوْعِدُهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
being perverse; Gehenna shall be their promised land all together.
44
لَهَا سَبْعَةُ أَبْوَابٍ لِكُلِّ بَابٍ مِنْهُمْ جُزْءٌ مَقْسُومٌ
Seven gates it has, and unto each gate a set portion of them belongs.'
45
إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ
But the godfearing shall be amidst gardens and fountains:
46
ادْخُلُوهَا بِسَلَامٍ آمِنِينَ
'Enter you them, in peace and security!'
47
وَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِمْ مِنْ غِلٍّ إِخْوَانًا عَلَىٰ سُرُرٍ مُتَقَابِلِينَ
We shall strip away all rancour that is in their breasts; as brothers they shall be upon couches set face to face;
48
لَا يَمَسُّهُمْ فِيهَا نَصَبٌ وَمَا هُمْ مِنْهَا بِمُخْرَجِينَ
no fatigue there shall smite them, neither shall they ever be driven forth from there.
49
۞ نَبِّئْ عِبَادِي أَنِّي أَنَا الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ
Tell My servants I am the All-forgiving, the All-compassionate,
50
وَأَنَّ عَذَابِي هُوَ الْعَذَابُ الْأَلِيمُ
and that My chastisement is the painful chastisement.
51
وَنَبِّئْهُمْ عَنْ ضَيْفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ
And tell them of the guests of Abraham,
52
إِذْ دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَقَالُوا سَلَامًا قَالَ إِنَّا مِنْكُمْ وَجِلُونَ
when they entered unto him, saying, 'Peace!' He said, 'Behold, we are afraid of you.'
53
قَالُوا لَا تَوْجَلْ إِنَّا نُبَشِّرُكَ بِغُلَامٍ عَلِيمٍ
They said, 'Be not afraid; behold, we give thee good tidings of a cunning boy.'
54
قَالَ أَبَشَّرْتُمُونِي عَلَىٰ أَنْ مَسَّنِيَ الْكِبَرُ فَبِمَ تُبَشِّرُونَ
He said, 'What, do you give me good tidings, though old age has smitten me? Of what do you
55
قَالُوا بَشَّرْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ فَلَا تَكُنْ مِنَ الْقَانِطِينَ
give me good tidings?' They said, 'We give thee good tidings of truth. Be not of those that despair.'
56
قَالَ وَمَنْ يَقْنَطُ مِنْ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّهِ إِلَّا الضَّالُّونَ
He said, 'And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord, excepting those that are astray?'
57
قَالَ فَمَا خَطْبُكُمْ أَيُّهَا الْمُرْسَلُونَ
He said, 'And what is your business, envoys?'
58
قَالُوا إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَىٰ قَوْمٍ مُجْرِمِينَ
They said, 'We have been sent unto a people of sinners,
59
إِلَّا آلَ لُوطٍ إِنَّا لَمُنَجُّوهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
excepting the folk of Lot; them we shall deliver
60
إِلَّا امْرَأَتَهُ قَدَّرْنَا ۙ إِنَّهَا لَمِنَ الْغَابِرِينَ
all together, excepting his wife -- we have decreed, she shall surely be of those that tarry.'
61
فَلَمَّا جَاءَ آلَ لُوطٍ الْمُرْسَلُونَ
So, when the envoys came to the folk of Lot,
62
قَالَ إِنَّكُمْ قَوْمٌ مُنْكَرُونَ
he said, 'Surely you are a people unknown to me!'
63
قَالُوا بَلْ جِئْنَاكَ بِمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَمْتَرُونَ
They said, 'Nay, but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting.
64
وَأَتَيْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّا لَصَادِقُونَ
We have come to thee with the truth, and assuredly we speak truly.
65
فَأَسْرِ بِأَهْلِكَ بِقِطْعٍ مِنَ اللَّيْلِ وَاتَّبِعْ أَدْبَارَهُمْ وَلَا يَلْتَفِتْ مِنْكُمْ أَحَدٌ وَامْضُوا حَيْثُ تُؤْمَرُونَ
So set forth, thou with thy family, in a watch of the night, and follow after the backs of them, and let not any one of you turn round; and depart unto the place you are commanded.'
66
وَقَضَيْنَا إِلَيْهِ ذَٰلِكَ الْأَمْرَ أَنَّ دَابِرَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ مَقْطُوعٌ مُصْبِحِينَ
And We decreed for him that commandment, that the last remnant of those should be cut off in the morning.
67
وَجَاءَ أَهْلُ الْمَدِينَةِ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ
And the people of the city came rejoicing.
68
قَالَ إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ ضَيْفِي فَلَا تَفْضَحُونِ
He said, 'These are my guests; put me not to shame,
69
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَلَا تُخْزُونِ
and fear God, and do not degrade me.'
70
قَالُوا أَوَلَمْ نَنْهَكَ عَنِ الْعَالَمِينَ
They said, 'Have we not forbidden thee all beings?'
71
قَالَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ بَنَاتِي إِنْ كُنْتُمْ فَاعِلِينَ
He said, 'These are my daughters, if you would be doing.'
72
لَعَمْرُكَ إِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ
By thy life, they wandered blindly in their dazzlement,
73
فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ مُشْرِقِينَ
and the Cry seized them at the sunrise,
74
فَجَعَلْنَا عَالِيَهَا سَافِلَهَا وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حِجَارَةً مِنْ سِجِّيلٍ
and We turned it uppermost nethermost and rained on it stones of baked clay.
75
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ
Surely in that are signs for such as mark;
76
وَإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيلٍ مُقِيمٍ
surely it is on a way yet remaining;
77
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَةً لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
surely in that is a sign for believers.
78
وَإِنْ كَانَ أَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ لَظَالِمِينَ
Certainly the dwellers in the Thicket were evildoers,
79
فَانْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ وَإِنَّهُمَا لَبِإِمَامٍ مُبِينٍ
and We took vengeance on them. The two of them were upon a roadway manifest.
80
وَلَقَدْ كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ الْحِجْرِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
The dwellers in El-Hijr cried lies to the Envoys.
81
وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ آيَاتِنَا فَكَانُوا عَنْهَا مُعْرِضِينَ
We brought them. Our signs, and they turned away from them.
82
وَكَانُوا يَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتًا آمِنِينَ
They were hewing the mountains into houses, therein dwelling securely;
83
فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ مُصْبِحِينَ
and the Cry seized them in the morning;
84
فَمَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
that they earned did not avail them.
85
وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ ۗ وَإِنَّ السَّاعَةَ لَآتِيَةٌ ۖ فَاصْفَحِ الصَّفْحَ الْجَمِيلَ
We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, save in truth. Surely the Hour is coming; so pardon thou, with a gracious pardoning.
86
إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ الْخَلَّاقُ الْعَلِيمُ
Surely thy Lord, He is the All-creator, the All-knowing.
87
وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَاكَ سَبْعًا مِنَ الْمَثَانِي وَالْقُرْآنَ الْعَظِيمَ
We have given thee seven of the oft-repeated, and the mighty Koran.
88
لَا تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إِلَىٰ مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجًا مِنْهُمْ وَلَا تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
Stretch not thine eyes to that We have given pairs of them to enjoy; and do not sorrow for them, and lower thy wing unto the believers,
89
وَقُلْ إِنِّي أَنَا النَّذِيرُ الْمُبِينُ
and say, 'Surely, I am the manifest warner.'
90
كَمَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَى الْمُقْتَسِمِينَ
So We sent it down to the partitioners,
91
الَّذِينَ جَعَلُوا الْقُرْآنَ عِضِينَ
who have broken the Koran into fragments.
92
فَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
Now by thy Lord, We shall surely question them all together
93
عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
concerning that they were doing.
94
فَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
So shout that thou art commanded and turn thou away from the idolaters.
95
إِنَّا كَفَيْنَاكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِينَ
We suffice thee against the mockers,
96
الَّذِينَ يَجْعَلُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ ۚ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ
even against those who set up with God another god. Certainly they will soon know!
97
وَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ يَضِيقُ صَدْرُكَ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ
We know indeed thy breast is straitened by the things they say.
98
فَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ وَكُنْ مِنَ السَّاجِدِينَ
Proclaim thy Lord's praise, and be of those that bow,
99
وَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ
and serve thy Lord, until the Certain comes to thee.
