بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
وَالذَّارِيَاتِ ذَرْوًا
By the swift scatterers
2
فَالْحَامِلَاتِ وِقْرًا
and the burden-bearers
3
فَالْجَارِيَاتِ يُسْرًا
and the smooth runners
4
فَالْمُقَسِّمَاتِ أَمْرًا
and the partitioners,
5
إِنَّمَا تُوعَدُونَ لَصَادِقٌ
surely that you are promised is true,
6
وَإِنَّ الدِّينَ لَوَاقِعٌ
and surely the Doom is about to fall!
7
وَالسَّمَاءِ ذَاتِ الْحُبُكِ
By heaven with all its tracks
8
إِنَّكُمْ لَفِي قَوْلٍ مُخْتَلِفٍ
surely you speak at variance,
9
يُؤْفَكُ عَنْهُ مَنْ أُفِكَ
and perverted therefrom are some.
10
قُتِلَ الْخَرَّاصُونَ
Perish the conjecturers
11
الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي غَمْرَةٍ سَاهُونَ
who are dazed in perplexity
12
يَسْأَلُونَ أَيَّانَ يَوْمُ الدِّينِ
asking, 'When shall be the Day of Doom?'
13
يَوْمَ هُمْ عَلَى النَّارِ يُفْتَنُونَ
Upon the day when they shall be tried at the Fire:
14
ذُوقُوا فِتْنَتَكُمْ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كُنْتُمْ بِهِ تَسْتَعْجِلُونَ
'Taste your trial! This is that you were seeking to hasten.'
15
إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَعُيُونٍ
Surely the godfearing shall be among gardens and fountains
16
آخِذِينَ مَا آتَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَبْلَ ذَٰلِكَ مُحْسِنِينَ
taking whatsoever their Lord has given them; they were good-doers before that.
17
كَانُوا قَلِيلًا مِنَ اللَّيْلِ مَا يَهْجَعُونَ
Little of the night would they slumber,
18
وَبِالْأَسْحَارِ هُمْ يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ
and in the mornings they would ask for forgiveness;
19
وَفِي أَمْوَالِهِمْ حَقٌّ لِلسَّائِلِ وَالْمَحْرُومِ
and the beggar and the outcast had a share in their wealth.
20
وَفِي الْأَرْضِ آيَاتٌ لِلْمُوقِنِينَ
In the earth are signs for those having sure faith;
21
وَفِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ ۚ أَفَلَا تُبْصِرُونَ
and in your selves; what, do you not see?
22
وَفِي السَّمَاءِ رِزْقُكُمْ وَمَا تُوعَدُونَ
And in heaven is your provision, and that you are promised.
23
فَوَرَبِّ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ إِنَّهُ لَحَقٌّ مِثْلَ مَا أَنَّكُمْ تَنْطِقُونَ
So by the Lord of heaven and earth, it is as surely true as that you have speech.
24
هَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ ضَيْفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْمُكْرَمِينَ
Hast thou received the story of the honoured guests of Abraham?
25
إِذْ دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَقَالُوا سَلَامًا ۖ قَالَ سَلَامٌ قَوْمٌ مُنْكَرُونَ
When they entered unto him, saying 'Peace!' he said 'Peace! You are a people unknown to me.'
26
فَرَاغَ إِلَىٰ أَهْلِهِ فَجَاءَ بِعِجْلٍ سَمِينٍ
Then he turned to his household and brought a fattened calf,
27
فَقَرَّبَهُ إِلَيْهِمْ قَالَ أَلَا تَأْكُلُونَ
and he laid it before them saying, 'Will you not eat?'
28
فَأَوْجَسَ مِنْهُمْ خِيفَةً ۖ قَالُوا لَا تَخَفْ ۖ وَبَشَّرُوهُ بِغُلَامٍ عَلِيمٍ
Then he conceived a fear of them. They said, 'Be not afraid!' And they gave him good tidings of a cunning boy.
29
فَأَقْبَلَتِ امْرَأَتُهُ فِي صَرَّةٍ فَصَكَّتْ وَجْهَهَا وَقَالَتْ عَجُوزٌ عَقِيمٌ
Then came forward his wife, clamouring, and she smote her face, and said, 'An old woman, barren!'
30
قَالُوا كَذَٰلِكِ قَالَ رَبُّكِ ۖ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْحَكِيمُ الْعَلِيمُ
They said, 'So says thy Lord; He is the All-wise, the All-knowing.'
31
۞ قَالَ فَمَا خَطْبُكُمْ أَيُّهَا الْمُرْسَلُونَ
Said he, 'And what is your business, envoys?'
32
قَالُوا إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَىٰ قَوْمٍ مُجْرِمِينَ
They said, 'We have been sent to a people of sinners,
33
لِنُرْسِلَ عَلَيْهِمْ حِجَارَةً مِنْ طِينٍ
to loose upon them stones of clay
34
مُسَوَّمَةً عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ لِلْمُسْرِفِينَ
marked with thy Lord for the prodigal.
35
فَأَخْرَجْنَا مَنْ كَانَ فِيهَا مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
So We brought forth such believers as were in it,
36
فَمَا وَجَدْنَا فِيهَا غَيْرَ بَيْتٍ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
but We found not therein except one house of those that have surrendered themselves.
37
وَتَرَكْنَا فِيهَا آيَةً لِلَّذِينَ يَخَافُونَ الْعَذَابَ الْأَلِيمَ
And therein We left a sign to those who fear the painful chastisement.
38
وَفِي مُوسَىٰ إِذْ أَرْسَلْنَاهُ إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ
And also in Moses, when We sent him unto Pharaoh, with a clear authority,
39
فَتَوَلَّىٰ بِرُكْنِهِ وَقَالَ سَاحِرٌ أَوْ مَجْنُونٌ
but he turned his back, with his court, saying, 'A sorcerer, or a man possessed!'
40
فَأَخَذْنَاهُ وَجُنُودَهُ فَنَبَذْنَاهُمْ فِي الْيَمِّ وَهُوَ مُلِيمٌ
So We seized him and his hosts, and We cast them into the sea, and he blameworthy.
41
وَفِي عَادٍ إِذْ أَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمُ الرِّيحَ الْعَقِيمَ
And also in Ad, when We loosed against them the withering wind
42
مَا تَذَرُ مِنْ شَيْءٍ أَتَتْ عَلَيْهِ إِلَّا جَعَلَتْهُ كَالرَّمِيمِ
that left nothing it came upon, but made it as stuff decayed.
43
وَفِي ثَمُودَ إِذْ قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَمَتَّعُوا حَتَّىٰ حِينٍ
And also in Thamood, when it was said to them, 'Take your enjoyment for a while!'
44
فَعَتَوْا عَنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّهِمْ فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّاعِقَةُ وَهُمْ يَنْظُرُونَ
Then they turned in disdain from the commandment of their Lord, and the thunderbolt took them and they themselves beholding
45
فَمَا اسْتَطَاعُوا مِنْ قِيَامٍ وَمَا كَانُوا مُنْتَصِرِينَ
and they were not able to stand upright, and were not helped.
46
وَقَوْمَ نُوحٍ مِنْ قَبْلُ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا قَوْمًا فَاسِقِينَ
And the people of Noah before; surely they were an ungodly people.
47
وَالسَّمَاءَ بَنَيْنَاهَا بِأَيْدٍ وَإِنَّا لَمُوسِعُونَ
And heaven -- We built it with might, and We extend it wide.
48
وَالْأَرْضَ فَرَشْنَاهَا فَنِعْمَ الْمَاهِدُونَ
And the earth -- We spread it forth; O excellent Smoothers!
49
وَمِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقْنَا زَوْجَيْنِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ
And of everything created We two kinds; haply you will remember.
50
فَفِرُّوا إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
Therefore flee unto God! I am a clear warner from Him to you.
51
وَلَا تَجْعَلُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
And set not up with God another god; I am a clear warner from Him to you.
52
كَذَٰلِكَ مَا أَتَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا قَالُوا سَاحِرٌ أَوْ مَجْنُونٌ
Even so not a Messenger came to those before them but they said, 'A sorcerer, or a man possessed!'
53
أَتَوَاصَوْا بِهِ ۚ بَلْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ طَاغُونَ
What, have they bequeathed it one to another? Nay, but they are an insolent people.
54
فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ فَمَا أَنْتَ بِمَلُومٍ
So turn thou from them; thou wilt not be reproached.
55
وَذَكِّرْ فَإِنَّ الذِّكْرَىٰ تَنْفَعُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
And remind; the Reminder profits the believers.
56
وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنْسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ
I have not created jinn and mankind except to serve Me.
57
مَا أُرِيدُ مِنْهُمْ مِنْ رِزْقٍ وَمَا أُرِيدُ أَنْ يُطْعِمُونِ
I desire of them no provision, neither do I desire that they should feed Me.
58
إِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الرَّزَّاقُ ذُو الْقُوَّةِ الْمَتِينُ
Surely God is the All-provider, the Possessor of Strength, the Ever-Sure.
59
فَإِنَّ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا ذَنُوبًا مِثْلَ ذَنُوبِ أَصْحَابِهِمْ فَلَا يَسْتَعْجِلُونِ
The evildoers shall have their portion, like the portion of their fellows; so let them not hasten Me!
60
فَوَيْلٌ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ يَوْمِهِمُ الَّذِي يُوعَدُونَ
So woe to the unbelievers, for that day of theirs that they are promised.
