بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
ص ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ ذِي الذِّكْرِ
Sad. By the Koran, containing the Remembrance --
2
بَلِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي عِزَّةٍ وَشِقَاقٍ
nay, but the unbelievers glory in their schism.
3
كَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ مِنْ قَرْنٍ فَنَادَوْا وَلَاتَ حِينَ مَنَاصٍ
How many a generation We destroyed before them, and they called, but time was none to escape.
4
وَعَجِبُوا أَنْ جَاءَهُمْ مُنْذِرٌ مِنْهُمْ ۖ وَقَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا سَاحِرٌ كَذَّابٌ
Now they marvel that a warner has come to them from among them; and the unbelievers say, 'This is a lying sorcerer.
5
أَجَعَلَ الْآلِهَةَ إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا ۖ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ عُجَابٌ
What, has he made the gods One God? This is indeed a marvellous thing.'
6
وَانْطَلَقَ الْمَلَأُ مِنْهُمْ أَنِ امْشُوا وَاصْبِرُوا عَلَىٰ آلِهَتِكُمْ ۖ إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَشَيْءٌ يُرَادُ
And the Council of them depart, saying 'Go! Be steadfast to your gods; this is a thing to be desired.
7
مَا سَمِعْنَا بِهَٰذَا فِي الْمِلَّةِ الْآخِرَةِ إِنْ هَٰذَا إِلَّا اخْتِلَاقٌ
We have not heard of this in the last religion; this is surely an invention.
8
أَأُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ مِنْ بَيْنِنَا ۚ بَلْ هُمْ فِي شَكٍّ مِنْ ذِكْرِي ۖ بَلْ لَمَّا يَذُوقُوا عَذَابِ
What, has the Remembrance been sent down on him out of us all?' Nay, but they are in doubt of My Remembrance; nay, they have not yet tasted My chastisement.
9
أَمْ عِنْدَهُمْ خَزَائِنُ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّكَ الْعَزِيزِ الْوَهَّابِ
Or have they the treasuries of thy Lord's mercy, the All-mighty, the All-giving?
10
أَمْ لَهُمْ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا ۖ فَلْيَرْتَقُوا فِي الْأَسْبَابِ
Or is theirs the kingdom of the heavens and earth and of what between them is? Why, then let them ascend the cords!
11
جُنْدٌ مَا هُنَالِكَ مَهْزُومٌ مِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ
A very host of parties is routed there!
12
كَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ وَعَادٌ وَفِرْعَوْنُ ذُو الْأَوْتَادِ
Cried lies before them the people of Noah, and Ad, and Pharaoh, he of the tent-pegs,
13
وَثَمُودُ وَقَوْمُ لُوطٍ وَأَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ الْأَحْزَابُ
and Thamood, and the people of Lot, and the men of the Thicket - those were the parties;
14
إِنْ كُلٌّ إِلَّا كَذَّبَ الرُّسُلَ فَحَقَّ عِقَابِ
not one, that cried not lies to the Messengers, so My retribution was just.
15
وَمَا يَنْظُرُ هَٰؤُلَاءِ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً مَا لَهَا مِنْ فَوَاقٍ
These are only awaiting for a single Cry, to which there is no delay.
16
وَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا عَجِّلْ لَنَا قِطَّنَا قَبْلَ يَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ
They say, 'Our Lord, hasten to us our share before the Day of Reckoning.'
17
اصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ وَاذْكُرْ عَبْدَنَا دَاوُودَ ذَا الْأَيْدِ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ
Bear patiently what they say, and remember Our servant David, the man of might; he was a penitent.
18
إِنَّا سَخَّرْنَا الْجِبَالَ مَعَهُ يُسَبِّحْنَ بِالْعَشِيِّ وَالْإِشْرَاقِ
With him We subjected the mountains to give glory at evening and sunrise,
19
وَالطَّيْرَ مَحْشُورَةً ۖ كُلٌّ لَهُ أَوَّابٌ
and the birds, duly mustered, every one to him reverting;
20
وَشَدَدْنَا مُلْكَهُ وَآتَيْنَاهُ الْحِكْمَةَ وَفَصْلَ الْخِطَابِ
We strengthened his kingdom, and gave him wisdom and speech decisive.
21
۞ وَهَلْ أَتَاكَ نَبَأُ الْخَصْمِ إِذْ تَسَوَّرُوا الْمِحْرَابَ
Has the tiding of the dispute come to thee? When they scaled the Sanctuary,
22
إِذْ دَخَلُوا عَلَىٰ دَاوُودَ فَفَزِعَ مِنْهُمْ ۖ قَالُوا لَا تَخَفْ ۖ خَصْمَانِ بَغَىٰ بَعْضُنَا عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ فَاحْكُمْ بَيْنَنَا بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا تُشْطِطْ وَاهْدِنَا إِلَىٰ سَوَاءِ الصِّرَاطِ
when they entered upon David, and he took fright at them; and they said, 'Fear not; two disputants we are -- one of us has injured the other; so judge between us justly, and transgress not, and guide us to the right path.'
23
إِنَّ هَٰذَا أَخِي لَهُ تِسْعٌ وَتِسْعُونَ نَعْجَةً وَلِيَ نَعْجَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ فَقَالَ أَكْفِلْنِيهَا وَعَزَّنِي فِي الْخِطَابِ
'Behold, this my brother has ninety-nine ewes, and I have one ewe. So he said, "Give her into my charge"; and he overcame me in the argument.'
24
قَالَ لَقَدْ ظَلَمَكَ بِسُؤَالِ نَعْجَتِكَ إِلَىٰ نِعَاجِهِ ۖ وَإِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِنَ الْخُلَطَاءِ لَيَبْغِي بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَقَلِيلٌ مَا هُمْ ۗ وَظَنَّ دَاوُودُ أَنَّمَا فَتَنَّاهُ فَاسْتَغْفَرَ رَبَّهُ وَخَرَّ رَاكِعًا وَأَنَابَ ۩
Said he, 'Assuredly he has wronged thee in asking for thy ewe in addition to his sheep; and indeed many intermixers do injury one against the other, save those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness -- and how few they are!' And David thought that We had only tried him; therefore he sought forgiveness of his Lord, and he fell down, bowing, and he repented.
25
فَغَفَرْنَا لَهُ ذَٰلِكَ ۖ وَإِنَّ لَهُ عِنْدَنَا لَزُلْفَىٰ وَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ
Accordingly We forgave him that, and he has a near place in Our presence and a fair resort.
26
يَا دَاوُودُ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاكَ خَلِيفَةً فِي الْأَرْضِ فَاحْكُمْ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ وَلَا تَتَّبِعِ الْهَوَىٰ فَيُضِلَّكَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَضِلُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ بِمَا نَسُوا يَوْمَ الْحِسَابِ
'David, behold, We have appointed thee a viceroy in the earth; therefore judge between men justly, and follow not caprice, lest it lead thee astray from the way of God. Surely those who go astray from the way of God -- there awaits them a terrible chastisement, for that they have forgotten the Day of Reckoning.'
27
وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاءَ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا بَاطِلًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ ظَنُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۚ فَوَيْلٌ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنَ النَّارِ
We have not created the heavens and earth, and what between them is, for vanity; such is the thought of the unbelievers, wherefore woe unto the unbelievers because of the Fire!
28
أَمْ نَجْعَلُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَالْمُفْسِدِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ نَجْعَلُ الْمُتَّقِينَ كَالْفُجَّارِ
Or shall We make those who believe and do righteous deeds as the workers of corruption in the earth, or shall We make the godfearing as the transgressors?
29
كِتَابٌ أَنْزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ مُبَارَكٌ لِيَدَّبَّرُوا آيَاتِهِ وَلِيَتَذَكَّرَ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ
A Book We have sent down to thee, Blessed, that men possessed of minds may ponder its signs and so remember.
30
وَوَهَبْنَا لِدَاوُودَ سُلَيْمَانَ ۚ نِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ
And We gave unto David Solomon; how excellent a servant he was! He was a penitent.
31
إِذْ عُرِضَ عَلَيْهِ بِالْعَشِيِّ الصَّافِنَاتُ الْجِيَادُ
When in the evening were presented to him the standing steeds,
32
فَقَالَ إِنِّي أَحْبَبْتُ حُبَّ الْخَيْرِ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّي حَتَّىٰ تَوَارَتْ بِالْحِجَابِ
he said, 'Lo, I have loved the love of good things better than the remembrance of my Lord, until the sun was bidden behind the veil.
33
رُدُّوهَا عَلَيَّ ۖ فَطَفِقَ مَسْحًا بِالسُّوقِ وَالْأَعْنَاقِ
Return them to me!' And he began to stroke their shanks and necks.
34
وَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا سُلَيْمَانَ وَأَلْقَيْنَا عَلَىٰ كُرْسِيِّهِ جَسَدًا ثُمَّ أَنَابَ
Certainly We tried Solomon, and We cast upon his throne a mere body; then he repented.
35
قَالَ رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَهَبْ لِي مُلْكًا لَا يَنْبَغِي لِأَحَدٍ مِنْ بَعْدِي ۖ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ الْوَهَّابُ
He said, 'My Lord, forgive me, and give me a kingdom such as may not befall anyone after me; surely Thou art the All-giver.'
36
فَسَخَّرْنَا لَهُ الرِّيحَ تَجْرِي بِأَمْرِهِ رُخَاءً حَيْثُ أَصَابَ
So We subjected to him the wind, that ran at his commandment, softly, wherever he might light on,
37
وَالشَّيَاطِينَ كُلَّ بَنَّاءٍ وَغَوَّاصٍ
and the Satans, every builder and diver
38
وَآخَرِينَ مُقَرَّنِينَ فِي الْأَصْفَادِ
and others also, coupled in fetters:
39
هَٰذَا عَطَاؤُنَا فَامْنُنْ أَوْ أَمْسِكْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
'This is Our gift; bestow or withhold without reckoning.'
40
وَإِنَّ لَهُ عِنْدَنَا لَزُلْفَىٰ وَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ
And he had a near place in Our presence and a fair resort.
41
وَاذْكُرْ عَبْدَنَا أَيُّوبَ إِذْ نَادَىٰ رَبَّهُ أَنِّي مَسَّنِيَ الشَّيْطَانُ بِنُصْبٍ وَعَذَابٍ
Remember also Our servant Job; when he called to his Lord, 'Behold, Satan has visited me with weariness and chastisement.'
42
ارْكُضْ بِرِجْلِكَ ۖ هَٰذَا مُغْتَسَلٌ بَارِدٌ وَشَرَابٌ
'Stamp thy foot! This is a laving-place cool, and a drink.'
43
وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ أَهْلَهُ وَمِثْلَهُمْ مَعَهُمْ رَحْمَةً مِنَّا وَذِكْرَىٰ لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ
And We gave to him his family, and the like of them with them, as a mercy from us, and a reminder unto men possessed of minds;
44
وَخُذْ بِيَدِكَ ضِغْثًا فَاضْرِبْ بِهِ وَلَا تَحْنَثْ ۗ إِنَّا وَجَدْنَاهُ صَابِرًا ۚ نِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ ۖ إِنَّهُ أَوَّابٌ
and, 'Take in thy hand a bundle of rushes, and strike therewith, and do not fail in thy oath.' Surely We found him a steadfast man. How excellent a servant he was! He was a penitent.
45
وَاذْكُرْ عِبَادَنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ أُولِي الْأَيْدِي وَالْأَبْصَارِ
Remember also Our servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob -- men of might they and of vision.
46
إِنَّا أَخْلَصْنَاهُمْ بِخَالِصَةٍ ذِكْرَى الدَّارِ
Assuredly We purified them with a quality most pure, the remembrance of the Abode,
47
وَإِنَّهُمْ عِنْدَنَا لَمِنَ الْمُصْطَفَيْنَ الْأَخْيَارِ
and in Our sight they are of the chosen, the excellent.
48
وَاذْكُرْ إِسْمَاعِيلَ وَالْيَسَعَ وَذَا الْكِفْلِ ۖ وَكُلٌّ مِنَ الْأَخْيَارِ
Remember also Our servants Ishmael, Elisha, and Dhul Kifl; each is among the excellent.
49
هَٰذَا ذِكْرٌ ۚ وَإِنَّ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ لَحُسْنَ مَآبٍ
This is a Remembrance; and for the godfearing is a fair resort,
50
جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ مُفَتَّحَةً لَهُمُ الْأَبْوَابُ
Gardens of Eden, whereof the gates are open to them,
51
مُتَّكِئِينَ فِيهَا يَدْعُونَ فِيهَا بِفَاكِهَةٍ كَثِيرَةٍ وَشَرَابٍ
wherein they recline, and wherein they call for fruits abundant, and sweet potions,
52
۞ وَعِنْدَهُمْ قَاصِرَاتُ الطَّرْفِ أَتْرَابٌ
and with them maidens restraining their glances of equal age.
53
هَٰذَا مَا تُوعَدُونَ لِيَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ
'This is what you were promised for the Day of Reckoning;
54
إِنَّ هَٰذَا لَرِزْقُنَا مَا لَهُ مِنْ نَفَادٍ
this is Our provision, unto which there is no end.'
55
هَٰذَا ۚ وَإِنَّ لِلطَّاغِينَ لَشَرَّ مَآبٍ
All this; but for the insolent awaits an ill resort,
56
جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا فَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ
Gehenna, wherein they are roasted - an evil cradling!
57
هَٰذَا فَلْيَذُوقُوهُ حَمِيمٌ وَغَسَّاقٌ
All this; so let them taste it - boiling water and pus,
58
وَآخَرُ مِنْ شَكْلِهِ أَزْوَاجٌ
and other torments of the like kind coupled together.
59
هَٰذَا فَوْجٌ مُقْتَحِمٌ مَعَكُمْ ۖ لَا مَرْحَبًا بِهِمْ ۚ إِنَّهُمْ صَالُو النَّارِ
'This is a troop rushing in with you; there is no Welcome for them; they shall roast in the Fire.'
60
قَالُوا بَلْ أَنْتُمْ لَا مَرْحَبًا بِكُمْ ۖ أَنْتُمْ قَدَّمْتُمُوهُ لَنَا ۖ فَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ
They say, 'No, it is you have no Welcome; you forwarded it for us; how evil a stablishment!'
61
قَالُوا رَبَّنَا مَنْ قَدَّمَ لَنَا هَٰذَا فَزِدْهُ عَذَابًا ضِعْفًا فِي النَّارِ
They say, 'Our Lord, whoso forwarded this for us, give him a double chastisement in the Fire!'
62
وَقَالُوا مَا لَنَا لَا نَرَىٰ رِجَالًا كُنَّا نَعُدُّهُمْ مِنَ الْأَشْرَارِ
They say, 'How is it with us, that we do not see men here that we counted among the wicked?
63
أَتَّخَذْنَاهُمْ سِخْرِيًّا أَمْ زَاغَتْ عَنْهُمُ الْأَبْصَارُ
What, did we take them for a laughing-stock? Or have our eyes swerved away from them?'
64
إِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ لَحَقٌّ تَخَاصُمُ أَهْلِ النَّارِ
Surely that is true -- the disputing of the inhabitants of the Fire.
65
قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَنَا مُنْذِرٌ ۖ وَمَا مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ إِلَّا اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ
Say: 'I am only a warner. There is not any god but God, the One, the Omnipotent,
66
رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفَّارُ
Lord of the heavens and earth, and of what between them is, the All-mighty, the All-forgiving.'
67
قُلْ هُوَ نَبَأٌ عَظِيمٌ
Say: 'It is a mighty tiding
68
أَنْتُمْ عَنْهُ مُعْرِضُونَ
from which you are turning away.
69
مَا كَانَ لِيَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ بِالْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَىٰ إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ
I had no knowledge of the High Council when they disputed.
70
إِنْ يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ إِلَّا أَنَّمَا أَنَا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
This alone is revealed to me, that I am only a clear warner.'
71
إِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقٌ بَشَرًا مِنْ طِينٍ
When thy Lord said to the angels, 'See, I am creating a mortal of a clay.
72
فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي فَقَعُوا لَهُ سَاجِدِينَ
When I have shaped him, and breathed My spirit in him, fall you down, bowing before him!'
73
فَسَجَدَ الْمَلَائِكَةُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ
Then the angels bowed themselves all together,
74
إِلَّا إِبْلِيسَ اسْتَكْبَرَ وَكَانَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
save Iblis; he waxed proud, and was one of the unbelievers.
75
قَالَ يَا إِبْلِيسُ مَا مَنَعَكَ أَنْ تَسْجُدَ لِمَا خَلَقْتُ بِيَدَيَّ ۖ أَسْتَكْبَرْتَ أَمْ كُنْتَ مِنَ الْعَالِينَ
Said He, 'Iblis, what prevented thee to bow thyself before that I created with My own hands? Hast thou waxed proud, or art thou of the lofty ones?'
76
قَالَ أَنَا خَيْرٌ مِنْهُ ۖ خَلَقْتَنِي مِنْ نَارٍ وَخَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ طِينٍ
Said he, 'I am better than he; Thou createdst me of fire, and him Thou createdst of clay.'
77
قَالَ فَاخْرُجْ مِنْهَا فَإِنَّكَ رَجِيمٌ
Said He, 'Then go thou forth hence; thou art accursed.
78
وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكَ لَعْنَتِي إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ
Upon thee shall rest My curse, till the Day of Doom.'
79
قَالَ رَبِّ فَأَنْظِرْنِي إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ
Said he, 'My Lord, respite me till the day they shall be raised.'
80
قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ مِنَ الْمُنْظَرِينَ
Said He, 'Thou art among the ones that are respited
81
إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْوَقْتِ الْمَعْلُومِ
until the day of the known time.'
82
قَالَ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ لَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
Said he, 'Now, by Thy glory, I shall pervert them all together,
83
إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ
excepting those Thy servants among them that are sincere.'
84
قَالَ فَالْحَقُّ وَالْحَقَّ أَقُولُ
Said He, 'This is the truth, and the truth I say;
85
لَأَمْلَأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنْكَ وَمِمَّنْ تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
I shall assuredly fill Gehenna with thee, and with whosoever of them follows thee, all together.'
86
قُلْ مَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْرٍ وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُتَكَلِّفِينَ
Say: 'I ask of you no wage for it, neither am I of those who take things upon themselves.
87
إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا ذِكْرٌ لِلْعَالَمِينَ
It is nothing but a reminder unto all beings,
88
وَلَتَعْلَمُنَّ نَبَأَهُ بَعْدَ حِينٍ
and you shall surely know its tiding after a while.'
