بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
ق ۚ وَالْقُرْآنِ الْمَجِيدِ
Qaf. By the glorious Koran!
2
بَلْ عَجِبُوا أَنْ جَاءَهُمْ مُنْذِرٌ مِنْهُمْ فَقَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ هَٰذَا شَيْءٌ عَجِيبٌ
Nay, but they marvel that a warner has come to them from among them; and the unbelievers say, 'This is a marvellous thing!
3
أَإِذَا مِتْنَا وَكُنَّا تُرَابًا ۖ ذَٰلِكَ رَجْعٌ بَعِيدٌ
What, when we are dead and become dust? That is a far returning!'
4
قَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا تَنْقُصُ الْأَرْضُ مِنْهُمْ ۖ وَعِنْدَنَا كِتَابٌ حَفِيظٌ
We know what the earth diminishes of them; with Us is a book recording.
5
بَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِالْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ فَهُمْ فِي أَمْرٍ مَرِيجٍ
Nay, but they cried lies to the truth when it came to them, and so they are in a case confused.
6
أَفَلَمْ يَنْظُرُوا إِلَى السَّمَاءِ فَوْقَهُمْ كَيْفَ بَنَيْنَاهَا وَزَيَّنَّاهَا وَمَا لَهَا مِنْ فُرُوجٍ
What, have they not beheld heaven above them, how We have built it, and decked it out fair, and it has no cracks?
7
وَالْأَرْضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا وَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنْبَتْنَا فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ زَوْجٍ بَهِيجٍ
And the earth -- We stretched it forth, and cast on it firm mountains, and We caused to grow therein of every joyous kind
8
تَبْصِرَةً وَذِكْرَىٰ لِكُلِّ عَبْدٍ مُنِيبٍ
for an insight and a reminder to every penitent servant.
9
وَنَزَّلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً مُبَارَكًا فَأَنْبَتْنَا بِهِ جَنَّاتٍ وَحَبَّ الْحَصِيدِ
And We sent down out of heaven water blessed, and caused to grow thereby gardens and grain of harvest
10
وَالنَّخْلَ بَاسِقَاتٍ لَهَا طَلْعٌ نَضِيدٌ
and tall palm-trees with spathes compact,
11
رِزْقًا لِلْعِبَادِ ۖ وَأَحْيَيْنَا بِهِ بَلْدَةً مَيْتًا ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ الْخُرُوجُ
a provision for the servants, and thereby We revived a land that was dead. Even so is the coming forth.
12
كَذَّبَتْ قَبْلَهُمْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ وَأَصْحَابُ الرَّسِّ وَثَمُودُ
Cried lies before them the people of Noah and the men of Er-Rass, and Thamood,
13
وَعَادٌ وَفِرْعَوْنُ وَإِخْوَانُ لُوطٍ
and Ad and Pharaoh, the brothers of Lot,
14
وَأَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ وَقَوْمُ تُبَّعٍ ۚ كُلٌّ كَذَّبَ الرُّسُلَ فَحَقَّ وَعِيدِ
the men of the Thicket, the people of Tubba'. Every one cried lies to the Messengers, and My threat came true.
15
أَفَعَيِينَا بِالْخَلْقِ الْأَوَّلِ ۚ بَلْ هُمْ فِي لَبْسٍ مِنْ خَلْقٍ جَدِيدٍ
What, were We wearied by the first creation? No indeed; but they are in uncertainty as to the new creation.
16
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ نَفْسُهُ ۖ وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ
We indeed created man; and We know what his soul whispers within him, and We are nearer to him than the jugular vein.
17
إِذْ يَتَلَقَّى الْمُتَلَقِّيَانِ عَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ قَعِيدٌ
When the two angels meet together, sitting one on the right, and one on the left,
18
مَا يَلْفِظُ مِنْ قَوْلٍ إِلَّا لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ
not a word he utters, but by him is an observer ready.
19
وَجَاءَتْ سَكْرَةُ الْمَوْتِ بِالْحَقِّ ۖ ذَٰلِكَ مَا كُنْتَ مِنْهُ تَحِيدُ
And death's agony comes in truth; that is what thou wast shunning!
20
وَنُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ الْوَعِيدِ
And the Trumpet shall be blown; that is the Day of the Threat.
21
وَجَاءَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَعَهَا سَائِقٌ وَشَهِيدٌ
And every soul shall come, and with it a driver and a witness.
22
لَقَدْ كُنْتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ هَٰذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنْكَ غِطَاءَكَ فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ
'Thou wast heedless of this; therefore We have now removed from thee thy covering, and so thy sight today is piercing.'
23
وَقَالَ قَرِينُهُ هَٰذَا مَا لَدَيَّ عَتِيدٌ
And his comrade shall say, 'This is what I have, made ready.'
24
أَلْقِيَا فِي جَهَنَّمَ كُلَّ كَفَّارٍ عَنِيدٍ
'Cast, you twain, into Gehenna every froward unbeliever,
25
مَنَّاعٍ لِلْخَيْرِ مُعْتَدٍ مُرِيبٍ
every hinderer of the good, transgressor, disquieter,
26
الَّذِي جَعَلَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ فَأَلْقِيَاهُ فِي الْعَذَابِ الشَّدِيدِ
who set up with God another god; therefore, you twain, cast him into the terrible chastisement.'
27
۞ قَالَ قَرِينُهُ رَبَّنَا مَا أَطْغَيْتُهُ وَلَٰكِنْ كَانَ فِي ضَلَالٍ بَعِيدٍ
And his comrade shall say, 'Our Lord, I made him not insolent, but he was in far error.'
28
قَالَ لَا تَخْتَصِمُوا لَدَيَّ وَقَدْ قَدَّمْتُ إِلَيْكُمْ بِالْوَعِيدِ
He shall say, 'Dispute not before Me! For I sent you beforehand -- the threat.
29
مَا يُبَدَّلُ الْقَوْلُ لَدَيَّ وَمَا أَنَا بِظَلَّامٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ
The Word is not changed with Me; I wrong not My servants.'
30
يَوْمَ نَقُولُ لِجَهَنَّمَ هَلِ امْتَلَأْتِ وَتَقُولُ هَلْ مِنْ مَزِيدٍ
Upon the day We shall say unto Gehenna, 'Art thou filled?' And it shall say, 'Are there any more to come?'
31
وَأُزْلِفَتِ الْجَنَّةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ غَيْرَ بَعِيدٍ
And Paradise shall be brought forward to the godfearing, not afar:
32
هَٰذَا مَا تُوعَدُونَ لِكُلِّ أَوَّابٍ حَفِيظٍ
'This is that you were promised; it is for every mindful penitent.'
33
مَنْ خَشِيَ الرَّحْمَٰنَ بِالْغَيْبِ وَجَاءَ بِقَلْبٍ مُنِيبٍ
Whosoever fears the All-merciful in the Unseen, and comes with a penitent heart:
34
ادْخُلُوهَا بِسَلَامٍ ۖ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ الْخُلُودِ
'Enter it in peace! This is the Day of Eternity.'
35
لَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ فِيهَا وَلَدَيْنَا مَزِيدٌ
Therein they shall have whatever they will; and with Us there is yet more.
36
وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُمْ مِنْ قَرْنٍ هُمْ أَشَدُّ مِنْهُمْ بَطْشًا فَنَقَّبُوا فِي الْبِلَادِ هَلْ مِنْ مَحِيصٍ
How many a generation We destroyed before them that was stronger in valour than they, then they searched about in the land; was there any asylum?
37
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَذِكْرَىٰ لِمَنْ كَانَ لَهُ قَلْبٌ أَوْ أَلْقَى السَّمْعَ وَهُوَ شَهِيدٌ
Surely in that there is a reminder to him who has a heart, or will give ear with a present mind.
38
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ وَمَا مَسَّنَا مِنْ لُغُوبٍ
We created the heavens and the earth, and what between them is, in six days, and no weariness touched Us.
39
فَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ الْغُرُوبِ
So be thou patient under what they say, and proclaim thy Lord's praise before the rising of the sun, and before its setting,
40
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْهُ وَأَدْبَارَ السُّجُودِ
and proclaim thy Lord's praise in the night, and at the ends of the prostrations.
41
وَاسْتَمِعْ يَوْمَ يُنَادِ الْمُنَادِ مِنْ مَكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
And listen thou for the day when the caller shall call from a near place.
42
يَوْمَ يَسْمَعُونَ الصَّيْحَةَ بِالْحَقِّ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ يَوْمُ الْخُرُوجِ
On the day they hear the Cry in truth, that is the day of coming forth.
43
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نُحْيِي وَنُمِيتُ وَإِلَيْنَا الْمَصِيرُ
It is We who give life, and make to die, and to Us is the homecoming.
44
يَوْمَ تَشَقَّقُ الْأَرْضُ عَنْهُمْ سِرَاعًا ۚ ذَٰلِكَ حَشْرٌ عَلَيْنَا يَسِيرٌ
Upon the day when the earth is split asunder from about them as they hasten forth; that is a mustering easy for Us.
45
نَحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ ۖ وَمَا أَنْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِجَبَّارٍ ۖ فَذَكِّرْ بِالْقُرْآنِ مَنْ يَخَافُ وَعِيدِ
We know very well what they say; thou art not a tyrant over them. Therefore remind by the Koran him who fears My threat.
