بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
الْحَاقَّةُ
The Indubitable!
2
مَا الْحَاقَّةُ
What is the Indubitable?
3
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْحَاقَّةُ
And what will teach thee what is the Indubitable?
4
كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ وَعَادٌ بِالْقَارِعَةِ
Thamood and Ad cried lies to the Clatterer.
5
فَأَمَّا ثَمُودُ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِالطَّاغِيَةِ
As for Thamood, they were destroyed by the Screamer;
6
وَأَمَّا عَادٌ فَأُهْلِكُوا بِرِيحٍ صَرْصَرٍ عَاتِيَةٍ
and as for Ad, they were destroyed by a wind clamorous,
7
سَخَّرَهَا عَلَيْهِمْ سَبْعَ لَيَالٍ وَثَمَانِيَةَ أَيَّامٍ حُسُومًا فَتَرَى الْقَوْمَ فِيهَا صَرْعَىٰ كَأَنَّهُمْ أَعْجَازُ نَخْلٍ خَاوِيَةٍ
violent that He compelled against them seven nights and eight days, uninterruptedly, and thou mightest see the people laid prostrate in it as if they were the stumps of fallen down palm-trees.
8
فَهَلْ تَرَىٰ لَهُمْ مِنْ بَاقِيَةٍ
Now dost thou see any remnant of them?
9
وَجَاءَ فِرْعَوْنُ وَمَنْ قَبْلَهُ وَالْمُؤْتَفِكَاتُ بِالْخَاطِئَةِ
Pharaoh likewise, and those before him, and the Subverted Cities -- they committed error,
10
فَعَصَوْا رَسُولَ رَبِّهِمْ فَأَخَذَهُمْ أَخْذَةً رَابِيَةً
and they rebelled against the Messenger of their Lord, and He seized them with a surpassing grip.
11
إِنَّا لَمَّا طَغَى الْمَاءُ حَمَلْنَاكُمْ فِي الْجَارِيَةِ
Lo, when the waters rose, We bore you in the running ship
12
لِنَجْعَلَهَا لَكُمْ تَذْكِرَةً وَتَعِيَهَا أُذُنٌ وَاعِيَةٌ
that We might make it a reminder for you and for heeding ears to hold.
13
فَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ نَفْخَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ
So, when the Trumpet is blown with a single blast
14
وَحُمِلَتِ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ فَدُكَّتَا دَكَّةً وَاحِدَةً
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow,
15
فَيَوْمَئِذٍ وَقَعَتِ الْوَاقِعَةُ
then, on that day, the Terror shall come to pass,
16
وَانْشَقَّتِ السَّمَاءُ فَهِيَ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَاهِيَةٌ
and heaven shall be split, for upon that day it shall be very frail,
17
وَالْمَلَكُ عَلَىٰ أَرْجَائِهَا ۚ وَيَحْمِلُ عَرْشَ رَبِّكَ فَوْقَهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ ثَمَانِيَةٌ
and the angels shall stand upon its borders, and upon that day eight shall carry above them the Throne of thy Lord.
18
يَوْمَئِذٍ تُعْرَضُونَ لَا تَخْفَىٰ مِنْكُمْ خَافِيَةٌ
On that day you shall be exposed, not one secret of yours concealed.
19
فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ فَيَقُولُ هَاؤُمُ اقْرَءُوا كِتَابِيَهْ
Then as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he shall say, 'Here, take and read my book!
20
إِنِّي ظَنَنْتُ أَنِّي مُلَاقٍ حِسَابِيَهْ
Certainly I thought that I should encounter my reckoning.'
21
فَهُوَ فِي عِيشَةٍ رَاضِيَةٍ
So he shall be in a pleasing life
22
فِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ
in a lofty Garden,
23
قُطُوفُهَا دَانِيَةٌ
its clusters nigh to gather.
24
كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِي الْأَيَّامِ الْخَالِيَةِ
'Eat and drink with wholesome appetite for that you did long ago, in the days gone by.'
25
وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِشِمَالِهِ فَيَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي لَمْ أُوتَ كِتَابِيَهْ
But as for him who is given his book in his left hand, he shall say, 'Would that I had not been given my book
26
وَلَمْ أَدْرِ مَا حِسَابِيَهْ
and not known my reckoning!
27
يَا لَيْتَهَا كَانَتِ الْقَاضِيَةَ
Would it had been the end!
28
مَا أَغْنَىٰ عَنِّي مَالِيَهْ ۜ
My wealth has not availed me,
29
هَلَكَ عَنِّي سُلْطَانِيَهْ
my authority is gone from me.'
30
خُذُوهُ فَغُلُّوهُ
'Take him, and fetter him,
31
ثُمَّ الْجَحِيمَ صَلُّوهُ
and then roast him in Hell,
32
ثُمَّ فِي سِلْسِلَةٍ ذَرْعُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعًا فَاسْلُكُوهُ
then in a chain of seventy cubits' length insert him!
33
إِنَّهُ كَانَ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ الْعَظِيمِ
Behold, he never believed in God the All-mighty,
34
وَلَا يَحُضُّ عَلَىٰ طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ
and he never urged the feeding of the needy;
35
فَلَيْسَ لَهُ الْيَوْمَ هَاهُنَا حَمِيمٌ
therefore he today has not here one loyal friend,
36
وَلَا طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِنْ غِسْلِينٍ
neither any food saving foul pus,
37
لَا يَأْكُلُهُ إِلَّا الْخَاطِئُونَ
that none excepting the sinners eat.'
38
فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِمَا تُبْصِرُونَ
No! I swear by that you see
39
وَمَا لَا تُبْصِرُونَ
and by that you do not see,
40
إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ
it is the speech of a noble Messenger.
41
وَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَاعِرٍ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تُؤْمِنُونَ
It is not the speech of a poet (little do you believe)
42
وَلَا بِقَوْلِ كَاهِنٍ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تَذَكَّرُونَ
nor the speech of a soothsayer (little do you remember).
43
تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
A sending down from the Lord of all Being.
44
وَلَوْ تَقَوَّلَ عَلَيْنَا بَعْضَ الْأَقَاوِيلِ
Had he invented against Us any sayings,
45
لَأَخَذْنَا مِنْهُ بِالْيَمِينِ
We would have seized him by the right hand,
46
ثُمَّ لَقَطَعْنَا مِنْهُ الْوَتِينَ
then We would surely have cut his life-vein
47
فَمَا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ أَحَدٍ عَنْهُ حَاجِزِينَ
and not one of you could have defended him.
48
وَإِنَّهُ لَتَذْكِرَةٌ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
Surely it is a Reminder to the godfearing;
49
وَإِنَّا لَنَعْلَمُ أَنَّ مِنْكُمْ مُكَذِّبِينَ
but We know that some of you will cry lies.
50
وَإِنَّهُ لَحَسْرَةٌ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ
Surely it is a sorrow to the unbelievers;
51
وَإِنَّهُ لَحَقُّ الْيَقِينِ
yet indeed it is the truth of certainty.
52
فَسَبِّحْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الْعَظِيمِ
Then magnify the Name of thy Lord, the All-mighty.
