بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
إِنَّا أَرْسَلْنَا نُوحًا إِلَىٰ قَوْمِهِ أَنْ أَنْذِرْ قَوْمَكَ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
We sent Noah to his people, saying, 'Warn thy people, ere there come on them a painful chastisement.'
2
قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي لَكُمْ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
He said, 'O my people, I am unto you a clear warner,
3
أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَاتَّقُوهُ وَأَطِيعُونِ
saying, "Serve God, and fear Him, and obey you me,
4
يَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ مِنْ ذُنُوبِكُمْ وَيُؤَخِّرْكُمْ إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ۚ إِنَّ أَجَلَ اللَّهِ إِذَا جَاءَ لَا يُؤَخَّرُ ۖ لَوْ كُنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
and He will forgive you your sins, and defer you to a stated term; God's term, when it comes, cannot be deferred, did you but know."'
5
قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُ قَوْمِي لَيْلًا وَنَهَارًا
He said; 'My Lord, I have called my people by night and by day,
6
فَلَمْ يَزِدْهُمْ دُعَائِي إِلَّا فِرَارًا
but my calling has only increased them in flight.
7
وَإِنِّي كُلَّمَا دَعَوْتُهُمْ لِتَغْفِرَ لَهُمْ جَعَلُوا أَصَابِعَهُمْ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَاسْتَغْشَوْا ثِيَابَهُمْ وَأَصَرُّوا وَاسْتَكْبَرُوا اسْتِكْبَارًا
And whenever I called them, that Thou mightest forgive them, they put their fingers in their ears, and wrapped them in their garments, and persisted, and waxed very proud.
8
ثُمَّ إِنِّي دَعَوْتُهُمْ جِهَارًا
Then indeed I called them openly;
9
ثُمَّ إِنِّي أَعْلَنْتُ لَهُمْ وَأَسْرَرْتُ لَهُمْ إِسْرَارًا
then indeed I spoke publicly unto them, and I spoke unto them secretly,
10
فَقُلْتُ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارًا
and I said, "Ask you forgiveness of your Lord; surely He is ever All-forgiving,
11
يُرْسِلِ السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَارًا
and He will loose heaven upon you in torrents
12
وَيُمْدِدْكُمْ بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ أَنْهَارًا
and will succour you with wealth and sons, and will appoint for you gardens, and will appoint for you rivers.
13
مَا لَكُمْ لَا تَرْجُونَ لِلَّهِ وَقَارًا
What ails you, that you look not for majesty in God,
14
وَقَدْ خَلَقَكُمْ أَطْوَارًا
seeing He created you by stages?
15
أَلَمْ تَرَوْا كَيْفَ خَلَقَ اللَّهُ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ طِبَاقًا
Have you not regarded how God created seven heavens one upon another,
16
وَجَعَلَ الْقَمَرَ فِيهِنَّ نُورًا وَجَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ سِرَاجًا
and set the moon therein for a light and the sun for a lamp?
17
وَاللَّهُ أَنْبَتَكُمْ مِنَ الْأَرْضِ نَبَاتًا
And God caused you to grow out of the earth,
18
ثُمَّ يُعِيدُكُمْ فِيهَا وَيُخْرِجُكُمْ إِخْرَاجًا
then He shall return you into it, and bring you forth.
19
وَاللَّهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ بِسَاطًا
And God has laid the earth for you as a carpet,
20
لِتَسْلُكُوا مِنْهَا سُبُلًا فِجَاجًا
that thereof you may thread ways, ravines."
21
قَالَ نُوحٌ رَبِّ إِنَّهُمْ عَصَوْنِي وَاتَّبَعُوا مَنْ لَمْ يَزِدْهُ مَالُهُ وَوَلَدُهُ إِلَّا خَسَارًا
Noah said, 'My Lord, they have rebelled against me, and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss,
22
وَمَكَرُوا مَكْرًا كُبَّارًا
and have devised a mighty device
23
وَقَالُوا لَا تَذَرُنَّ آلِهَتَكُمْ وَلَا تَذَرُنَّ وَدًّا وَلَا سُوَاعًا وَلَا يَغُوثَ وَيَعُوقَ وَنَسْرًا
and have said, "Do not leave your gods, and do not leave Wadd, nor Suwa', Yaghuth, Ya'uq, neither Nasr."
24
وَقَدْ أَضَلُّوا كَثِيرًا ۖ وَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا ضَلَالًا
And they have led many astray. Increase Thou not the evildoers save in error!'
25
مِمَّا خَطِيئَاتِهِمْ أُغْرِقُوا فَأُدْخِلُوا نَارًا فَلَمْ يَجِدُوا لَهُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ أَنْصَارًا
And because of their transgressions they were drowned, and admitted into a Fire, for they found not, apart from God, any to help them.
26
وَقَالَ نُوحٌ رَبِّ لَا تَذَرْ عَلَى الْأَرْضِ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ دَيَّارًا
And Noah said, 'My Lord, leave not upon the earth of the unbelievers even one.
27
إِنَّكَ إِنْ تَذَرْهُمْ يُضِلُّوا عِبَادَكَ وَلَا يَلِدُوا إِلَّا فَاجِرًا كَفَّارًا
Surely, if Thou leavest them, they will lead Thy servants astray, and will beget none but unbelieving libertines.
28
رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِمَنْ دَخَلَ بَيْتِيَ مُؤْمِنًا وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا تَبَارًا
My Lord, forgive me and my parents and whosoever enters my house as a believer, and the believers, men and women alike; and do Thou not increase the evildoers save in ruin!'
