بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE
1
وَالطُّورِ
By the Mount
2
وَكِتَابٍ مَسْطُورٍ
and a Book inscribed
3
فِي رَقٍّ مَنْشُورٍ
in a parchment unrolled,
4
وَالْبَيْتِ الْمَعْمُورِ
by the House inhabited
5
وَالسَّقْفِ الْمَرْفُوعِ
and the roof uplifted
6
وَالْبَحْرِ الْمَسْجُورِ
and the sea swarming,
7
إِنَّ عَذَابَ رَبِّكَ لَوَاقِعٌ
surely thy Lord's chastisement is about to fall;
8
مَا لَهُ مِنْ دَافِعٍ
there is none to avert it.
9
يَوْمَ تَمُورُ السَّمَاءُ مَوْرًا
Upon the day when heaven spins dizzily
10
وَتَسِيرُ الْجِبَالُ سَيْرًا
and the mountains are in motion,
11
فَوَيْلٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُكَذِّبِينَ
woe that day unto those that cry lies,
12
الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي خَوْضٍ يَلْعَبُونَ
such as play at plunging,
13
يَوْمَ يُدَعُّونَ إِلَىٰ نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ دَعًّا
the day when they shall be pitched into the fire of Gehenna:
14
هَٰذِهِ النَّارُ الَّتِي كُنْتُمْ بِهَا تُكَذِّبُونَ
'This is the fire that you cried lies to!
15
أَفَسِحْرٌ هَٰذَا أَمْ أَنْتُمْ لَا تُبْصِرُونَ
What, is this magic, or is it you that do not see?
16
اصْلَوْهَا فَاصْبِرُوا أَوْ لَا تَصْبِرُوا سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْكُمْ ۖ إِنَّمَا تُجْزَوْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
Roast in it! And bear you patiently, or bear not patiently, equal it is to you; you are only being recompensed for that you were working.'
17
إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَنَعِيمٍ
Surely the godfearing shall be in gardens and bliss,
18
فَاكِهِينَ بِمَا آتَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ وَوَقَاهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ عَذَابَ الْجَحِيمِ
rejoicing in that their Lord has given them; and their Lord shall guard them against the chastisement of Hell.
19
كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
'Eat and drink, with wholesome appetite, for that you were working.
20
مُتَّكِئِينَ عَلَىٰ سُرُرٍ مَصْفُوفَةٍ ۖ وَزَوَّجْنَاهُمْ بِحُورٍ عِينٍ
Reclining upon couches ranged in rows; and We shall espouse them to wide-eyed houris.
21
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاتَّبَعَتْهُمْ ذُرِّيَّتُهُمْ بِإِيمَانٍ أَلْحَقْنَا بِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ وَمَا أَلَتْنَاهُمْ مِنْ عَمَلِهِمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ ۚ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ بِمَا كَسَبَ رَهِينٌ
And those who believed, and their seed followed them in belief, We shall join their seed with them, and We shall not defraud them of aught of their work; every man shall be pledged for what he earned.
22
وَأَمْدَدْنَاهُمْ بِفَاكِهَةٍ وَلَحْمٍ مِمَّا يَشْتَهُونَ
And We shall succour them with fruits and flesh such as they desire
23
يَتَنَازَعُونَ فِيهَا كَأْسًا لَا لَغْوٌ فِيهَا وَلَا تَأْثِيمٌ
while they pass therein a cup one to another wherein is no idle talk, no cause of sin,
24
۞ وَيَطُوفُ عَلَيْهِمْ غِلْمَانٌ لَهُمْ كَأَنَّهُمْ لُؤْلُؤٌ مَكْنُونٌ
and there go round them youths, their own, as if they were hidden pearls.
25
وَأَقْبَلَ بَعْضُهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ يَتَسَاءَلُونَ
They advance one upon another, asking each other questions.
26
قَالُوا إِنَّا كُنَّا قَبْلُ فِي أَهْلِنَا مُشْفِقِينَ
They say, 'We were before among our people, ever going in fear,
27
فَمَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَيْنَا وَوَقَانَا عَذَابَ السَّمُومِ
and God was gracious to us, and guarded us against the chastisement of the burning wind;
28
إِنَّا كُنَّا مِنْ قَبْلُ نَدْعُوهُ ۖ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْبَرُّ الرَّحِيمُ
we were before ever calling upon Him; surely He is the All-benign, the All-compassionate.'
29
فَذَكِّرْ فَمَا أَنْتَ بِنِعْمَتِ رَبِّكَ بِكَاهِنٍ وَلَا مَجْنُونٍ
Therefore remind! by thy Lord's blessing thou art not a soothsayer neither possessed.
30
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ شَاعِرٌ نَتَرَبَّصُ بِهِ رَيْبَ الْمَنُونِ
Or do they say, 'He is a poet for whom we await Fate's uncertainty'?
31
قُلْ تَرَبَّصُوا فَإِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنَ الْمُتَرَبِّصِينَ
Say: 'Await! I shall be awaiting with you.'
32
أَمْ تَأْمُرُهُمْ أَحْلَامُهُمْ بِهَٰذَا ۚ أَمْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ طَاغُونَ
Or do their intellects bid them do this? Or are they an insolent people?
33
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ تَقَوَّلَهُ ۚ بَلْ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ
Or do they say, 'He has invented it?' Nay, but they do not believe.
34
فَلْيَأْتُوا بِحَدِيثٍ مِثْلِهِ إِنْ كَانُوا صَادِقِينَ
Then let them bring a discourse like it, if they speak truly.
35
أَمْ خُلِقُوا مِنْ غَيْرِ شَيْءٍ أَمْ هُمُ الْخَالِقُونَ
Or were they created out of nothing? Or are they the creators?
36
أَمْ خَلَقُوا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ ۚ بَلْ لَا يُوقِنُونَ
Or did they create the heavens and earth? Nay, but they have not sure faith.
37
أَمْ عِنْدَهُمْ خَزَائِنُ رَبِّكَ أَمْ هُمُ الْمُصَيْطِرُونَ
Or are thy Lord's treasuries in their keeping? Or are they the registrars?
38
أَمْ لَهُمْ سُلَّمٌ يَسْتَمِعُونَ فِيهِ ۖ فَلْيَأْتِ مُسْتَمِعُهُمْ بِسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ
Or have they a ladder whereon they listen? Then let any of them that has listened bring a clear authority.
39
أَمْ لَهُ الْبَنَاتُ وَلَكُمُ الْبَنُونَ
Or has He daughters, and they sons?
40
أَمْ تَسْأَلُهُمْ أَجْرًا فَهُمْ مِنْ مَغْرَمٍ مُثْقَلُونَ
Or askest thou them for a wage, and so they are weighed down with debt?
41
أَمْ عِنْدَهُمُ الْغَيْبُ فَهُمْ يَكْتُبُونَ
Or is the Unseen in their keeping, and so they are writing it down?
42
أَمْ يُرِيدُونَ كَيْدًا ۖ فَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا هُمُ الْمَكِيدُونَ
Or desire they to outwit? The unbelievers, they are the outwitted.
43
أَمْ لَهُمْ إِلَٰهٌ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ ۚ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
Or have they a god, other than God? Glory be to God, above that which they associate!
44
وَإِنْ يَرَوْا كِسْفًا مِنَ السَّمَاءِ سَاقِطًا يَقُولُوا سَحَابٌ مَرْكُومٌ
Even if they saw lumps falling from heaven, they would say, 'A massed cloud!'
45
فَذَرْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ يُلَاقُوا يَوْمَهُمُ الَّذِي فِيهِ يُصْعَقُونَ
Then leave them, till they encounter their day wherein they shall be thunderstruck,
46
يَوْمَ لَا يُغْنِي عَنْهُمْ كَيْدُهُمْ شَيْئًا وَلَا هُمْ يُنْصَرُونَ
the day when their guile shall avail them naught, and they shall not be helped.
47
وَإِنَّ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا عَذَابًا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
And there surely awaits the evildoers a chastisement beyond even that, but most of them know it not.
48
وَاصْبِرْ لِحُكْمِ رَبِّكَ فَإِنَّكَ بِأَعْيُنِنَا ۖ وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ حِينَ تَقُومُ
And be thou patient under the judgment of thy Lord; surely thou art before Our eyes. And proclaim the praise of thy Lord when thou arisest,
49
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْهُ وَإِدْبَارَ النُّجُومِ
and proclaim the praise of thy Lord in the night, and at the declining of the stars.
