/*title*/Devaputta Samyutta (Sons of the Devas)
2.6 Kamada Sutta: Kamada's Lament
translated from the Pali by
Andrew Olendzki
© 2005

[Kamada:]
So hard it is to do, Lord,
It's so very hard to do!

[Buddha:]
But still they do what's hard to do,
Who steady themselves with virtue.
For one pursuing homelessness,
Content arrives, and with it joy.

[Kamada:]
So hard it is to get, Lord,
This content of which you speak!

[Buddha:]
But still they get what's hard to get,
Who delight in a tranquil mind.
The mind of those, both day and night,
Delights in its development.

[Kamada:]
So hard it is to tame, Lord,
This mind of which you speak!

[Buddha:]
But still they tame what's hard to tame,
Who delight in senses at peace.
Cutting through mortality's net,
The nobles, Kamada, proceed.

[Kamada:]
So hard it is to go, Lord,
On this path that gets so rough!

[Buddha:]
Still nobles, Kamada, proceed
On paths both rough and hard to take.
Those who are less than noble fall
On their heads when the path gets rough.
But for nobles the path is smooth
— For nobles smooth out what is rough!
Translator's note

This plaintive cry of the deva Kamada, concerning the difficulty of Buddhist practice, will resonate with almost anyone who has embarked on the temporary homelessness of a retreat at IMS or elsewhere. The steady reply of the Buddha here admonishes Kamada to overcome his weaknesses and find the nobility within himself to tread the noble path.

The tone of this poem is so typical of the approach the Buddha displays throughout the Pali texts — compassionate yet firm, reasoned but profoundly inspiring. The progression is also characteristic — from virtue to joy, tranquillity to diligent development, and finally cutting through the snares of death and rebirth and proceeding to undying nibbana.

Kamada is reminded that others have done, gotten and tamed what he is having such difficulty doing, getting and taming. Others have taken the hard path to the goal, and all he lacks is the resolve, the hero's determination, to forge ahead despite the obstacles.

The lyrical almost sing-song quality of the verse has been hopefully retained by translating it in something like its original meter of eight syllables per line.


2.7 Pañcalacanda Sutta: Pañcalacanda the Deva's Son
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 2007

Translator's note

The first verse in this discourse focuses on jhana as a crucial element in the path to release. The Buddha's "awakening to jhana" apparently refers to two points in his career as a bodhisatta: (1) the point when, realizing the futility of self-torture, he surmised that jhana might form the path to awakening; and (2) his realization of the extent to which jhana actually could lead to the knowledge that yielded in full awakening. (For details on both of these points, see MN 35.) In the second verse, the Buddha expands on Pañcalacanda's understanding of the practice of jhana by pointing out that it has to be endowed with mindfulness to be genuinely right concentration. This point is related to the fact that the various lists of activities constituting the path — such as the five faculties, the seven factors for awakening, and the noble eightfold path — always place right mindfulness before right concentration. It's also related to the statement in MN 44 that the four satipatthanas — establishings of mindfulness or frames of reference — form the nimitta, or theme, of right concentration.

AN 9.42 contains an explanation of the first verse here, in which Ven. Ananda identifies the first jhana as the opening offering escape from the confining place of sensual pleasures, and each successive level of jhana as the opening offering escape from the confining place of the preceeding jhana. Finally, he says, the cessation of perception & feeling acts as the ultimate opening offering escape from all forms of confinement.

At Savatthi. As he was standing to one side, Pañcalacanda the deva's son recited this verse in the Blessed One's presence:

Truly in a confining place, he found an opening —
the one of extensive wisdom,
the awakened one who awakened to jhana,[1] 
		the chief bull, withdrawn,
		the sage.

[The Buddha:]
Even in a confining place they find it,
[Pañcalacanda, said the Blessed One,]
the Dhamma for the attainment of Unbinding.
	Those who have gained mindfulness
	are rightly well-centered.[2] 

Notes
1.
In The Connected Discourses of the Buddha (CDB), this phrase is translated as "who discovered jhana," but the verb is abuddhi: "awakened to."
2.
In CDB, this sentence is translated as a continuation of the preceding one: "those who have acquired mindfulness, those perfectly well concentrated." However, the Pali is constructed of two clauses in the ye ... te ... format that constitutes a separate sentence.


2.8 Taayano Sutta: Taayana
translated from the Pali by
Maurice O'Connell Walshe
© 2007
The Pali title of this sutta is based on the PTS (Feer) edition.

Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was staying at Saavatthii...Then Taayana, son of the devas,[1] formerly a teacher of a [different] sect,...[2] spoke thus in verse before the Blessed One:

Put forth strength and cut the stream at the source,
Brahman,[3] scatter all desires of the sense.[4] 
Else the sage can not attain the goal.[5] 
That which must be done, with vigor do:[6] 
Feeble recluseship but stirs up dust.
Better nothing done than evil wrought:
Ill one's done will cause one pain again.
If the deed is good, it's better done:
Good deeds will bring no pain to come.
A blade of grass if wrongly seized,
Will only serve to cut the clumsy hand,
So ascetic life, if wrongly tried,
Merely drags one down to states of woe.[7] 
Whatever action's slackly carried out,
Practices improperly observed,
Dubious keeping of the holy life:
None of this will bring a great reward.
So said Taayana the devas' son and, so saying, he passed with his right side to the Blessed One in salutation and vanished there and then. And when the night was past the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus.

[He repeated the verses and then said:]

"Bhikkhus, learn Taayana's verses, learn them by heart; Taayana's verses are for your good, they pertain to the fundamentals of the holy life."

Notes
1.
Devaputta. See Vol. I, n. 7.
2.
Though he held certain wrong views, he believed in kamma (a vital point!), and so was reborn in a heaven state. He came to realize the superiority of the Buddha's teaching and therefore came to encourage disciples.
3.
Used here in the sense of a recluse.
4.
Dhp 383.
5.
Ekatta.m: "unity."
6.
The next 16 lines are found (differently ordered) as Dhp 313/314, 311/312.
7.
Niraya: "the downward path."


2.9 Candima Sutta: The Moon Deity's Prayer for Protection
translated from the Pali by
Piyadassi Thera
© 1999

Thus have I heard:

On one occasion the Blessed One was living near Savatthi, at Jetavana at Anathpindika's monastery. At that time Candima, the moon deity, was seized by Rahu, lord of Asura. Thereupon calling to mind the Blessed One, Candima, the moon deity, recited this stanza:

i. "O Buddha, the Hero, thou art wholly free from all evil. My adoration to thee. I have fallen into distress. Be thou my refuge."

Thereupon the Blessed One addressed a stanza to Rahu, Lord of Asuras, on behalf of Candima, thus:

ii. "O Rahu, Candima has gone for refuge to the Tathagata, the Consummate One. Release Candima. The Buddhas radiate compassion on the world (of beings)."

Thereupon Rahu, Lord of Asuras, released Candima, the deity, and immediately came to the presence of Vepacitta, Lord of Asuras, and stood beside him trembling with fear and with hair standing on end. Then Vepacitta addressed Rahu in this stanza.

iii. "Rahu. Why did you suddenly release Candima? Why have you come trembling, and why are you standing here terrified?"

"I have been spoken to by the Buddha in a stanza (requesting me to release Candima). If I had not released Candima my head would have split into seven pieces. While yet I live, I should have had no happiness. (Therefore I released Candima)."


2.10 Suriya Sutta: The Sun Deity's Prayer for Protection
translated from the Pali by
Piyadassi Thera
© 1999

Thus have I heard:

On one occasion the Blessed One was living near Savatthi at Jetavana at Anathapindika's monastery. At that time Suriya, the sun deity, was seized by Rahu, Lord of Asuras. Thereupon calling to mind the Blessed One, Suriya, the Sun deity, recited this stanza:

i. "O Buddha, the Hero, thou art wholly free from all evil. My adoration to thee. I have fallen into distress. Be thou my refuge."

Thereupon the Blessed One addressed a stanza to Rahu, Lord of Asuras, on behalf of Suriya thus:

ii. "O Rahu, Suriya has gone for refuge to the Tathagata, the Consummate One. Release Suriya. The Buddhas radiate compassion on the world (of beings).

iii. "O Rahu, swallow not the dispeller of darkness, the shining one, the radiant and effulgent traveler through the sky. Rahu, release Suriya, my son."

Thereupon Rahu, Lord of Asuras, released Suriya, and immediately came to the presence of Vepacitta, Lord of Asuras, and stood beside him trembling with fear and with hair standing on end. Then Vepacitta addressed Rahu in this stanza:

iv. "Rahu, why did you suddenly release Suriya? Why have you come trembling, and why are you standing here terrified?"

"I have been spoken to by the Buddha in a stanza (requesting me to release Suriya). If I had not released Suriya my head would have split into seven pieces. While yet I live, I should have had no happiness. (Therefore I released Suriya)."


2.19 Uttara Sutta: Uttara the Deva's Son
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998

At Rajagaha. As he was standing to one side, Uttara the deva's son recited this verse in the Blessed One's presence:

Life is swept along,
next-to-nothing its span.
For one swept on by aging
	no shelters exist.
Perceiving this danger in death,
one should do deeds of merit
	that bring about bliss.

[The Buddha:]
Life is swept along,
next-to-nothing its span.
For one swept to old age
	no shelters exist.
Perceiving this danger in death,
one should drop the world's bait
	and look for peace.


2.25 Jantu Sutta: Jantu
translated from the Pali by
Maurice O'Connell Walshe
© 2007
The Pali title of this sutta is based on the PTS (Feer) edition.

Thus have I heard. Once a large number of bhikkhus were living among the Kosalans, on the slopes of the Himalayas, in a forest-lodging. And they were haughty, unsteady, garrulous, of loose speech, unmindful, thoughtless, without concentration, with wandering minds and faculties uncontrolled. Now Jantu, son of the devas, on a fifteenth-day Uposatha,[1] came into the presence of those bhikkhus and addressed them in verse:

Happy was the life in former times,
Led by Gotama's disciples then:
Unhankering, they sought their frugal alms,
Unhankering, their lodging and their bed.
The world's impermanence they understood:
Knowing this, they made an end of woe.
Now, making evil-doers of themselves,
Just like village headmen they behave,
Eating, eating, till they drop with sleep,
Coveting the things their neighbor has.
To the Sangha having paid respect,
Certain bhikkhus present here I greet:
Others are like outcasts, masterless,
To the realm of hungry ghosts[2] as if consigned.
Those who thus persist in heedlessness
Are they to whom my message is addressed.
But to those who dwell in mindfulness
I accord full honor and respect.

Notes
1.
The Buddhist "sabbath": the eve of the full moon, the new moon, and the two intervening days, i.e., the 1st, 8th, 14th or 15th and 23rd day of the lunar month. The 15th day is used for exhortation. Called in Sri Lanka poya, and in Thailand wan phra.
2.
Petaa. Miserable beings who, because of previous greed and avarice, go hungry. I do not understand Mrs Rhys Davids rendering: "As cast out bodies of the dead."


2.26 Rohitassa Sutta: To Rohitassa
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1997
This sutta also appears at AN 4.45

On one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi, in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery. Then Rohitassa, the son of a deva, in the far extreme of the night, his extreme radiance lighting up the entirety of Jeta's Grove, went to the Blessed One. On arrival, having bowed down to the Blessed One, he stood to one side. As he was standing there he said to the Blessed One: "Is it possible, lord, by traveling, to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away or reappear?"

"I tell you, friend, that it is not possible by traveling to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away, or reappear."

"It is amazing, lord, and awesome, how well that has been said by the Blessed One: 'I tell you, friend, that it is not possible by traveling to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away, or reappear.' Once I was a seer named Rohitassa, a student of Bhoja, a powerful sky-walker. My speed was as fast as that of a strong archer — well-trained, a practiced hand, a practiced sharp-shooter — shooting a light arrow across the shadow of a palm tree. My stride stretched as far as the east sea is from the west. To me, endowed with such speed, such a stride, there came the desire: 'I will go traveling to the end of the cosmos.' I — with a one-hundred year life, a one-hundred year span — spent one hundred years traveling — apart from the time spent on eating, drinking, chewing & tasting, urinating & defecating, and sleeping to fight off weariness — but without reaching the end of the cosmos I died along the way. So it is amazing, lord, and awesome, how well that has been said by the Blessed One: 'I tell you, friend, that it is not possible by traveling to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away, or reappear.'"

[When this was said, the Blessed One responded:] "I tell you, friend, that it is not possible by traveling to know or see or reach a far end of the cosmos where one does not take birth, age, die, pass away, or reappear. But at the same time, I tell you that there is no making an end of suffering & stress without reaching the end of the cosmos. Yet it is just within this fathom-long body, with its perception & intellect, that I declare that there is the cosmos, the origination of the cosmos, the cessation of the cosmos, and the path of practice leading to the cessation of the cosmos."

It's not to be reached by traveling,
		the end of the cosmos —
		regardless.
And it's not without reaching
	the end of the cosmos
	that there is release
	from suffering & stress.

So, truly, the wise one,
an expert with regard to the cosmos,
a knower of the end of the cosmos,
having fulfilled the holy life,
	calmed,
knowing the cosmos' end,
	doesn't long for this cosmos
		or for any other.