/*title*/Devata-samyutta (Devas)
1.1 Ogha-tarana Sutta: Crossing over the Flood
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998

Translator's note: This discourse opens the Samyutta Nikaya with a paradox. The Commentary informs us that the Buddha teaches the devata in terms of the paradox in order to subdue her pride. To give this paradox some context, you might want to read other passages from the Canon that discuss right effort.

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery. Then a certain devata, in the far extreme of the night, her extreme radiance lighting up the entirety of Jeta's Grove, went to the Blessed One. On arrival, having bowed down to him, she stood to one side. As she was standing there, she said to him, "Tell me, dear sir, how you crossed over the flood."

"I crossed over the flood without pushing forward, without staying in place."[1]

"But how, dear sir, did you cross over the flood without pushing forward, without staying in place?"

"When I pushed forward, I was whirled about. When I stayed in place, I sank. And so I crossed over the flood without pushing forward, without staying in place."

[The devata:]
At long last I see
a brahman, totally unbound,
who     without pushing forward,
	without staying in place,
has crossed     over
	the entanglements
	of the world.
That is what the devata said. The Teacher approved. Realizing that "The Teacher has approved of me," she bowed down to him, circumambulated him — keeping him to her right — and then vanished right there.


Note
1.
Or: "unestablished." See Ud 8.1. Related references are in SN 12.38 and SN 12.64.



1.3 Upaneyya.m Sutta: Doomed
translated from the Pali by
Maurice O'Connell Walshe
© 2007

The Pali title of this sutta is based on the PTS (Feer) edition.
Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One was staying near Saavatthii, at Jeta Grove, in Anaathapi.n.dika's park. Now a certain deva,[1] as the night was passing away, lighting up the whole Jeta Grove with his effulgent beauty, approached the Blessed One and, having approached, stood on one side.

Standing thus on one side, the deva spoke this verse before the Blessed One:

Life but leads to doom. Our time is short.
From Decay there's naught can keep us safe.
Contemplating thus the fear of death,
Let's make merit that will bring us bliss.

[The Blessed One replied:]
Life but leads to doom. Our time is short.
From Decay there's naught can keep us safe.
Contemplating thus this fear of death,
Scorn such worldly bait, seek final peace.[2] 

Notes
1.
These words are repeated from the beginning of the whole work (SN 1.1), translated in Vol. I and Vol. II with slight differences. I render Bhagavaa literally as "the Blessed One" (Vol. I: "the Lord," Vol. II with KS "the Exalted One"). For the meaning of deva (or devataa) see Vol. I, n.1. In general, information given in the notes to Vols. I and II will not be repeated here.
2.
The Buddha here makes a vital distinction which is valid to this day as marking the difference between the aims of "popular Buddhism" and the serious treading of the Path. "Merit" (puñña) can lead to a happier rebirth, perhaps in one of the deva-worlds, but this too will come to an end. The proper course is to tread the Noble Eightfold Path and gain the "final peace" of Nibbaana. Note, however, the remarks of the Ven. Khantipalo in The Buddhist Monk's Discipline (WH 130/131, p.7): "Puñña is the benefit of increasing purity of mind derived from skillful actions such as generosity, virtue, helpfulness, etc. 'Merit' is an inadequate rendering."


1.9 Maanakaamo Sutta: Vain Conceits
translated from the Pali by
Maurice O'Connell Walshe
© 2007

The Pali title of this sutta is based on the PTS (Feer) edition.
...the deva spoke this verse...:

Who has not tamed all vain conceits,[1] 
Who lacks in wisdom, uncontrolled,
Heedless, in the woods may dwell alone,
Yet will not escape the realm of death.

[The Blessed One replied:]
Who, concentrated, leaves conceits behind,
His heart and mind[2] set fair, and wholly freed,
Heedful dwelling in the woods alone,
Shall indeed escape the realm of death.[3] 

Notes
1.
Maanakaama: "conceit and lust."
2.
Citta: "mind," but often like the metaphorical use of "heart" in English.
3.
He will pass "beyond death" to Nibbaana.


1.10 Arañña Sutta: The Wilderness
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998
Alternate translations: Ireland | Olendzki

Standing to one side, a devata addressed the Blessed One with a verse:

Living in the wilderness,
staying peaceful, remaining chaste,
eating just one meal a day:
why are their faces
	so bright & serene?

[The Buddha:]
They don't sorrow over the past,
	don't long for the future.
They survive on the present.
That's why their faces
	are bright & serene.
From longing for the future,
from sorrowing over the past,
	fools wither away
like a green reed cut down.


1.17 Dukkara.m (Kummo) Sutta: Difficult
The Tortoise
translated from the Pali by
Maurice O'Connell Walshe
© 2007
The Pali title of this sutta is based on the PTS (Feer) edition.
...the deva spoke this verse...:

Hard it is to keep, and hard to bear,
Recluse-life for him who lacks the skill.
Obstacles abound, the fool is lost.
How long can he endure the holy life,
If he cannot hold his heart in check?
Caught now here, now there, he stumbles, falls,

[The Blessed One replied:]
As the tortoise draws into his shell
Each limb, the monk, withdrawn, with mind applied,
Unattached, and doing harm to none,
Passions wholly stilled, dwells blaming none.[1] 

Notes
1.
Cf. Bhagavadgiitaa ii, 58: "He who withdraws his senses on all sides from sense-objects as the tortoise draws in his limbs, is firmly established in wisdom." The same image occurs in SN 35.199.


1.18 Hiri Sutta: Conscience
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1998

Who in the world
is a man constrained by conscience,
who awakens to censure
like a fine stallion    to the whip?
Those restrained by conscience
	are rare —
those who go through life
	always mindful.
Having reached the end
	of suffering & stress,
they go through what is uneven
	evenly;
	go through what is out-of-tune
	   in tune.


1.20 Samiddhi Sutta: About Samiddhi
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999
Alternate translation: Walshe

Translator's note: The Pali canon is unique in its approach to the spirit world. While confirming the existence of spirits and other more refined levels of beings, it insists that they are not worthy of worship. The Buddha, after all, is the teacher not only of human beings but also of heavenly beings; and many heavenly beings are not especially knowledgeable or spiritually advanced, in spite of their refined state. The Canon illustrates this point in a number of gentle satires. The most famous is the Kevatta Sutta (DN 14), where the ignorance & pomposity of a supposedly all-knowing creator is lampooned. This discourse is another entertaining example of the same genre, pointing out the difficulties of teaching more advanced Dhamma to any being — human or divine — who is obsessed with sensual pleasures. On hearing some verses concerning the awakened one's state of mind — which is not subject to time and is visible here-&-now — the devata cannot understand them, and is able to grasp only a few very basic principles of Dhamma practice. It's unusual for the Buddha to aim his words so far over the heads of his listeners. Perhaps in this case, as in SN 1.1, he wants to subdue the devata's pride. At any rate, there is hope for her: as the Commentary points out, her understanding covers in a rudimentary fashion all the elements of the Noble Eightfold Path. If she follows through with her understanding, she's on the road to the higher attainments.

This discourse also contains some word play on the words "time" (kala) and "subject to time" (kalika). "Time" can mean not only time in the general sense, but also one's time of death (a person who has died is said to have "done his/her time"). These two meanings of the word underlie the first exchange between Ven. Samiddhi and the devata. "Subject to time" can mean "obtainable only after a certain time" or "good only for a certain length of time": these meanings underlie their second exchange.

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rajagaha at Tapoda monastery. Then Ven. Samiddhi, as night was ending, got up & went to the Tapoda Hot Springs to bathe his limbs. Having bathed his limbs and gotten out of the springs, he stood wearing only his lower robe, letting his limbs dry.

Then a certain devata, in the far extreme of the night, her extreme radiance lighting up the entire Tapoda Hot Springs, approached Ven. Samiddhi. On arrival, while standing in the air, she addressed him with this verse:

Without having enjoyed
[sensual pleasures],
you go for alms, monk.
You don't go for alms
after having enjoyed.
Having enjoyed, monk,
then go for alms.
Don't let time pass you by.

[Ven. Samiddhi replied:]
I don't know my time.
	My time
is hidden.
It can't be seen.
That's why, not having enjoyed,
	I go for alms:
Don't let my time pass me by.
Then the devata, coming down to earth, said to Ven. Samiddhi, "You have gone forth while young, monk — black-haired, endowed with the blessings of youth in the first stage of life — without having played with sensual pleasures. Enjoy human sensuality, monk. Don't drop what is visible here-&-now in pursuit of what's subject to time."

"My friend, I'm not dropping what's visible here-&-now in pursuit of what's subject to time. I'm dropping what's subject to time in pursuit of what's visible here-&-now. For the Blessed One has said that sensual pleasures are subject to time, of much stress, much despair, & greater drawbacks; whereas this Dhamma is visible here-&-now, not subject to time, inviting all to come & see, pertinent, to be known by the wise for themselves."

"But, monk, in what way has the Blessed One said that sensual pleasures are subject to time, of much stress, much despair, & greater drawbacks? And how is this Dhamma visible here-&-now, not subject to time, inviting all to come & see, pertinent, to be known by the wise for themselves?"

"I'm new, my friend, not long gone forth, only recently come to this Dhamma & discipline. I can't explain it in detail. But the Blessed One, worthy & rightly self-awakened, is staying here in Rajagaha at Tapoda monastery. Having gone to him, ask him this matter. As he explains it, that's how you should remember it."

"Monk, it's not easy for us to go to the Blessed One, as he is surrounded by other devas of great influence. But if you go to the Blessed One and ask him this matter, I will come along to hear the Dhamma."

Responding to the devata, "As you say, my friend," Ven. Samiddhi went to the Blessed One. On arrival, he bowed down to the Blessed One and sat to one side. As he was sitting there [he told the Blessed One his entire conversation with the devata]. "Now, lord, if that devata was telling the truth, she is not far from here."

When this was said, the devata said to Ven. Samiddhi, "Ask, monk! Ask! I've gotten through."

Then the Blessed One recited this verse to the devata:

Perceiving in terms of signs, beings
take a stand on signs.
Not fully comprehending signs, they
come into the bonds
		of death.
But fully comprehending signs, one
doesn't construe
	a signifier.
Yet nothing exists for him
by which one would say,
'To him no thought occurs.'

If you know this, spirit, then say so.
"I don't understand, lord, the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement. It would be good if the Blessed One would speak in such a way that I would understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement."

[The Blessed One said:]

Whoever construes
	'equal,'
	'superior,' or
	'inferior,'
by that he'd dispute.
Whereas to one unaffected by these three,
	'equal'
	'superior'
			do not occur.

If you know this, spirit, then say so.
"I don't understand, lord, the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement. It would be good if the Blessed One would speak in such a way that I would understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement."


[The Blessed One said:]
Having 	shed classifications,
		gone beyond conceit,
he has here
	cut
through craving
	for name
	& form:
This one —
his bonds cut through,
	free 	from trouble,
		from longing —
though they search they can't find him,
	human & heavenly beings,
	here & beyond,
	in heaven
	or any abode.

If you know this, spirit, then say so.
"Lord, here's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Blessed One's brief statement:

In all the world,
	every world,
you should do no evil
with 	speech,
	body,
	or mind.
Having abandoned sensual pleasures
		— mindful, alert —
don't consort with suffering & stress,
	with what doesn't pertain
		to the goal."


1.25 Araha.m Sutta: The Arahant
translated from the Pali by
Maurice O'Connell Walshe
© 2007
The Pali title of this sutta is based on the PTS (Feer) edition.

[Deva:]
He who's an Arahant, his work achieved,
Free from taints, in final body clad,
That monk still might use such words as "I."
Still perchance might say: "They call this mine."
...
Would such a monk be prone to vain conceits?

[The Blessed One:]
Bonds are gone for him without conceits,
All delusion's chains are cast aside:
Truly wise, he's gone beyond such thoughts.[1] 
That monk still might use such words as "I,"
Still perchance might say: "They call this mine."
Well aware of common worldly speech,
He would speak conforming to such use.[2] 

Notes
1.
Ya.m mata.m: "whatever is thought." Mrs Rhys Davids's emendation of yamata.m in the text (paraphrased as "conceits and deemings of the errant mind," following the Commentarial maññana.m "imagining").
2.
Cf. DN 9: "These are merely names, expressions, turns of speech, designations in common use in the world, which the Tathaagata uses without misapprehending them."


1.38 Sakalika Sutta: The Stone Sliver
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999

Translator's note: Cullavagga VII tells of how Devadatta, the Buddha's cousin, tried unsuccessfully in various ways to wrest leadership of the Sangha from the Buddha. In Cv VII.3.9, he tries to kill the Buddha by hurling a rock down a mountainside. The rock is crushed, and so misses the Buddha, but sends out a splinter that pierces the Buddha's foot, drawing blood. According to the Commentary, this discourse together with SN 4.13 describe the Buddha's reaction to this attempt on his life.

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rajagaha at the Maddakucchi Deer Reserve. Now at that time his foot had been pierced by a stone sliver. Excruciating were the bodily feelings that developed within him — painful, fierce, sharp, wracking, repellent, disagreeable — but he endured them mindful, alert, & unperturbed. Having had his outer robe folded in four and laid out, he lay down on his right side in the lion's posture, with one foot placed on top of the other, mindful & alert.

Then 700 devatas from the Satullapa retinue, in the far extreme of the night, their extreme radiance lighting up the entirety of Maddakucchi, went to the Blessed One. On arrival, having bowed down to him, they stood to one side.

As she was standing there, one of the devatas exclaimed in the Blessed One's presence: "What a naga is Gotama the contemplative! And like a naga, when bodily feelings have arisen — painful, fierce, sharp, wracking, repellent, disagreeable — he endures them mindful, alert, & unperturbed!"

Then another devata exclaimed in the Blessed One's presence: "What a lion is Gotama the contemplative! And like a lion, when bodily feelings have arisen — painful, fierce, sharp, wracking, repellent, disagreeable — he endures them mindful, alert, & unperturbed!"

Then another devata exclaimed in the Blessed One's presence: "What a thoroughbred is Gotama the contemplative! And like a thoroughbred, when bodily feelings have arisen — painful, fierce, sharp, wracking, repellent, disagreeable — he endures them mindful, alert, & unperturbed!"

Then another devata exclaimed in the Blessed One's presence: "What a peerless bull is Gotama the contemplative! And like a peerless bull, when bodily feelings have arisen — painful, fierce, sharp, wracking, repellent, disagreeable — he endures them mindful, alert, & unperturbed!"

Then another devata exclaimed in the Blessed One's presence: "What a strong burden-carrier is Gotama the contemplative! And like a strong burden-carrier, when bodily feelings have arisen — painful, fierce, sharp, wracking, repellent, disagreeable — he endures them mindful, alert, & unperturbed!"

Then another devata exclaimed in the Blessed One's presence: "What a tamed one is Gotama the contemplative! And like a tamed one, when bodily feelings have arisen — painful, fierce, sharp, wracking, repellent, disagreeable — he endures them mindful, alert, & unperturbed!"

Then another devata exclaimed in the Blessed One's presence: "See a concentration well-developed, a mind well-released — neither pressed down nor forced back, nor with mental fabrication kept blocked or suppressed. Whoever would think that such a naga of a man, lion of a man, thoroughbred of a man, peerless bull of a man, strong burden-carrier of a man, such a tamed man should be violated: what else is that if not blindness?"

Five-Veda Brahmans,
living austerely
for 100 years:
	Their minds
	are not rightly released.
	Lowly by nature,
	they've not gone beyond.

Overpowered by craving,
bound up in precepts & practices,
performing wretched austerities
for 100 years:
	Their minds
	are not rightly released.
	Lowly by nature,
	they've not gone beyond.

For one fond of conceit,
	there's no taming;
for one uncentered,
	no sagacity.
Though alone in the wilderness,
if one lives heedlessly,
one won't cross over, beyond Mara's sway.

But having abandoned conceit,
well-centered within,
with right awareness
		everywhere
			fully released,
alone in the wilderness,
heedfully living,
one will cross over, beyond Mara's sway.


1.41 Aditta Sutta: (The House) On Fire
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1997

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's monastery. Then a certain devata, in the far extreme of the night, her extreme radiance lighting up the entirety of Jeta's Grove, went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, stood to one side. As she was standing there, she recited these verses in the Blessed One's presence:

When a house is on fire
the vessel salvaged
is the one that will be of use,
	not the one left there to burn.

So when the world is on fire
with aging and death,
one should salvage [one's wealth] by giving:
	what's given is well salvaged.

What's given bears fruit as pleasure.
What isn't given does not:
	thieves take it away, or kings;
	it gets burnt by fire or lost.

Then in the end
one leaves the body
together with one's possessions.
Knowing this, the intelligent man
enjoys possessions & gives.

Having enjoyed & given
in line with his means,
	uncensured he goes
	to the heavenly state.


1.42 Kindada Sutta: A Giver of What
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1997

[A deva:]
A giver of what is a giver of strength?
A giver of what, a giver of beauty?
A giver of what, a giver of ease?
A giver of what, a giver of vision?
And who is a giver of everything?
	Being asked, please explain this to me.

[The Buddha:]
A giver of food is a giver of strength.
A giver of clothes, a giver of beauty.
A giver of a vehicle, a giver of ease.
A giver of a lamp, a giver of vision.
And the one who gives a residence,
is the one who is a giver of everything.
		But the one who teaches the Dhamma
		is a giver of
		the Deathless.


1.69 Iccha Sutta: Desire
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999

[A deva:]
With what 	is the world tied down?
	With the subduing
of what 	is it freed?
	With the abandoning
of what 	are all bonds
			cut through?

[The Buddha:]
With desire		the world is tied down.
	With the subduing
of desire 	it's freed.
	With the abandoning
of desire 	all bonds
			are cut through.


1.71 Ghatva Sutta: Having Killed
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999

As she was standing to one side, a devata recited this verse to the Blessed One:

Having killed what
	do you sleep in ease?
Having killed what
	do you not grieve?
Of the slaying
of what one thing
	does Gotama approve?

[The Buddha:]
Having killed anger
	you sleep in ease.
Having killed anger
	you do not grieve.
The noble ones praise
the slaying of anger
	— with its honeyed crest
	& poison root —
for having killed it
	you do not grieve.