/*title*/Yakkha Samyutta (Yakkha demons)
10.8 Sudatta Sutta: About Sudatta (Anathapindika)
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999

Translator's note

Many discourses are set in Jeta's Grove, the monastery donated by Anathapindika. Here we learn how Anathapindika first met the Buddha. A dramatic point in the story revolves around the fact that most people knew of him by his epithet — Anathapindika means "Almsgiver to those without protection" — rather than by his given name. Thus he is surprised to hear the Buddha, at their first meeting, address him correctly.

The Cullavagga (VI) gives this same story in greater detail and adds more incidents: After reciting the verse with which this discourse ends, the Buddha gives Anathapindika a step-by-step teaching, culminating in an explanation of the four noble truths. At the end of the teaching, Anathapindika attains stream-entry. He then returns home to Savatthi, purchases a grove from Prince Jeta at immense price, and establishes a monastery for the Buddha and the Sangha. There, according to the commentaries, the Buddha spent more rains retreats than at any other monastery.

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rajagaha in the Cool Grove. Now at that time Anathapindika the householder had arrived in Rajagaha on some business. He heard, "An Awakened One, they say, has appeared in the world," and he wanted to go right then to see the Blessed One. Then the thought occurred to him, "Today is not the proper time to go to see the Blessed One. Tomorrow I will go to see the Blessed One at the proper time." With his mindfulness immersed in the Awakened One he lay down to sleep. Three times he got up during the night, thinking it was light. Then he went to the gate to the charnel ground. Non-human beings opened the gate.

When Anathapindika the householder had left the city, the light vanished and darkness appeared. Fear, terror, & horripilation arose, and because of that he wanted to turn back. Then Sivaka the yakkha-spirit, invisible, proclaimed:

A hundred elephants,
a hundred horses,
a hundred mule-drawn carts,
a hundred-thousand maidens
adorned with jewels & earrings
aren't worth one-sixteenth
of one step forward.

Go forward, householder!
Go forward, householder!
Going forward is better for you,
		not back!
The darkness then vanished for Anathapindika and the light appeared. The fear, terror, & horripilation he had felt subsided.

For a second time... a third time, the light vanished and darkness appeared. Fear, terror, & horripilation arose, and because of that Anathapindika wanted to turn back. Then for a third time, Sivaka the yakkha-spirit, invisible, proclaimed:

A hundred elephants,
a hundred horses,
a hundred mule-drawn carts,
a hundred-thousand maidens
adorned with jewels & earrings
aren't worth one-sixteenth
of one step forward.

Go forward, householder!
Go forward, householder!
Going forward is better for you,
		not back!
The darkness then vanished for Anathapindika and the light appeared. The fear, terror, & horripilation he had felt subsided.

So Anathapindika went to the Cool Grove. Now at that time, the Blessed One — having gotten up as the night was ending — was pacing back & forth in the open air. He saw Anathapindika the householder coming from afar. On seeing him, he got down from his meditation path and sat on a seat made ready. As he was sitting there he said to Anathapindika, "Come, Sudatta."

Then Anathapindika, [thinking,] "The Blessed One is calling me by my given name!" threw himself down right there at the Blessed One's feet and said to him, "Lord, I hope the Blessed One has slept in ease."

[The Buddha:]
Always, always,
he sleeps in ease:
the brahman totally unbound,
who doesn't adhere
to sensual pleasures,
who's without acquisitions
	& cooled.

Having 	cut all ties
		& subdued fear in the heart,
calmed,
he sleeps in ease,
		having reached peace
		of awareness.


10.12 Alavaka Sutta: To the Alavaka Yakkha
translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
© 1999
Alternate translation: Piyadassi
This sutta also appears at Sn 1.10.

Translator's note: This discourse is the source of many proverbs frequently quoted in Theravadin countries. In 1982, when Thailand was celebrating the 200th anniversary of the founding of the current dynasty, His Majesty the King structured his chief address to the Thai people around the four qualities mentioned in the Buddha's last verse.

I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying at Alavi in the haunt of the Alavaka yakkha. Then the Alavaka yakkha went to the Blessed One and on arrival said to him: "Get out, contemplative!"

[Saying,] "All right, my friend," the Blessed One went out.

"Come in, contemplative!"

[Saying,] "All right, my friend," the Blessed One went in.

A second time... A third time, the Alavaka yakkha said to the Blessed One, "Get out, contemplative!"

[Saying,] "All right, my friend," the Blessed One went out.

"Come in, contemplative!"

[Saying,] "All right, my friend," the Blessed One went in.

Then a fourth time, the Alavaka yakkha said to the Blessed One, "Get out, contemplative!"

"I won't go out, my friend. Do what you have to do."

"I will ask you a question, contemplative. If you can't answer me, I will possess your mind or rip open your heart or, grabbing you by the feet, hurl you across the Ganges."

"My friend, I see no one in the cosmos with its devas, Maras & Brahmas, its contemplatives & brahmans, its royalty & commonfolk, who could possess my mind or rip open my heart or, grabbing me by the feet, hurl me across the Ganges. But nevertheless, ask me what you wish."

[Alavaka:]
What	is a person's highest wealth?
What, when well-practiced, brings bliss?
What	is the highest of savors?
Living in what way
		is one's life called the best?

[The Buddha:]
Conviction 	is a person's highest wealth.
Dhamma, 	when well-practiced, brings bliss.
Truth is the highest of savors.[1] 
Living with discernment,
		one's life is called best.

[Alavaka:]
How 		does one cross over the flood?
How 		cross over the sea?
How 		does one overcome suffering & stress?
How 		is a person purified?

[The Buddha:]
Through conviction	one crosses over the flood.
Through heedfulness,	the sea.
Through persistence	one overcomes
		suffering & stress.
Through discernment		a person is purified.

[Alavaka:]
How 		does one gain discernment?
How 		does one find wealth?
How 		does one attain honor?
How 		bind friends to oneself?
	Passing from this world
	to
	the next world,
how		does one not grieve?

[The Buddha:]
Convinced of the arahants' Dhamma
for attaining Unbinding,
— heedful, observant —
one listening well
		gains discernment.
Doing what's fitting,
enduring burdens,
one with initiative
		finds wealth.
Through truth
		one attains honor.
Giving
		binds friends to oneself.

Endowed with these four qualities,
	— truth,
	self-control,
	stamina,
	relinquishment —
a householder of conviction,
on passing away, doesn't grieve.

Now, go ask others,
common brahmans & contemplatives,
if anything better than
	truth,
	self-control,
	endurance,
	& relinquishment
here can be found.

[Alavaka:]
How could I go ask
common brahmans & contemplatives? —
now that today I understand
	what benefits
	the next life.

It was truly for my well-being
that the Awakened One came
	to stay in Alavi.
Today I understand
where what is given
bears great fruit.

I will wander from village to village,
		town to town,
paying homage		to the Self-awakened One
& the true rightness	of the Dhamma.

Note
1.
This is apparently a reference to the concept of "savor" (rasa) in Indian aesthetic theory. For more on this topic, see the Introduction to Dhammapada: A Translation.